## Binomial Model
Also known as **Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model (CRR)** considers the following two types of assets
#### Bonds
Considered as a risk-free asset, the price is modeled as
$$B_t = B_0 (1 + r)^t$$
for $$t = 0, 1, \dots, T$$. $$B_0$$ is typically assumed as $$1$$.

#### Stocks
Stocks are considered as risk-models where the price evolution is captured using binomial random variables. We consider the model
$$ S_t = s_o \zeta_1 \dots \zeta_{t_1} = S_{t - 1} \zeta_t $$
where $$S_0 > 0$$ is the constant intial price. In this model, we assume $$P(\zeta_t = u) = p$$ and $$P(\zeta_t = d) = 1- p$$ where $$0 < d < 1 + r < u $$ where $$d, u$$ are the down and up movements respectively. That is, $$S_{t + 1} = S_t u$$ represents the price of the stock if the price has moved upward at time $$t$$.

\textcolor{red}{Need to add some stuff here}

Let the field $$\mathcal F_0 = \{ \phi, \Omega\}$$ and 
$$ \begin{align*}
	\mathcal F_1 &= \sigma(S_1) \\
	&= \{ \phi, \Omega, \{w: S_1(w) = S_0u \}, \{w: s_(1) = S_0 d\}\} \\
	&= \sigma(\{S_1 = S_0u\}), \{S_1 = S_0d\})
\end{align*} $$

This is a partition of $$\Omega$$. Similarly, for $$t = 2$$, we get $$\mathcal F_1 = \{ \phi, \Omega, \{uu, ud\}, \{dd, du\}\}$$. EXtrapolating this,
$$ \mathcal F_t = \sigma(S_1, \dots, S_t) = \sigma(\zeta_2, \dots, \zeta_t) $$
We get $$\#(\mathcal F)_t = 2^t$$. 

This evolution can be represented using a binomial tree of the following form - 

\textcolor{red}{Need to add tree here}


## Trading Strategy
A strategy $$\phi$$ consists of sequence of random variable pairs $$\phi = \{(\alpha_t, \beta_t); t = 1, \dots, T\}$$ where $$\alpha_t$$ represents the holdings of a stock and $$\beta_t$$ represents the holdings of a bond on day $$t$$ (The unit for time can be taken as minutes, hours, etc., but we consider days). We also have the following assumptions
1. Predictability: $$\alpha_t, \beta_t \in \mathcal F_{t - 1}, t = 1, \dots, T$$
2. Self-financing: $$\alpha_t S_t + \beta_t B_t = \alpha_{t + 1} S_t + \beta_{t + 1}B_t$$. That is, there is no influx or outflux of money asides from the changes in the underlying assets. We have some initial investment and assume that $$\alpha_1, \beta_1$$ are $$\mathcal F_0$$-measurable are constant.

The value of the portfolio at time $$t$$ is given by $$V_t(\phi) = \alpha_t S_t + \beta_t B_t, t = 1, \dots, T$$ and $$v_0(\phi) = \alpha_1 S_0 + \beta B_0 = \alpha_1 S_1 + \beta_1$$. We can now define the concept of **arbitrage** formally.

### Arbitrage
An arbitrage is a trading strategy $$\phi$$ such that $$V_0(\phi) = 0$$ and $$V_t(\phi) \geq 0 $$. That is, we don't have any initial investment and get a profit at time $$t = T$$. However, note that $$V_t(\phi)$$ is a random variable, so the inequality is assumed to be a point-wise inequality wherein $$V_T(\phi)(w) \geq 0, \forall w \in \Omega$$. This is a stronger assumption than $$P(V_T(\phi) > 0) > 0 \equiv E(V_T(\phi)) > 0 \equiv V_T(\phi)(w) > 0$$ for some $$w \in \Omega$$.
Notice that the last equivalence does not have any probability term in the expression. This equivalence is important to note since it makes the definition invariant of the underlying probability assumptions. 

### Hedge
A hedging strategy $$\phi$$ has the property $$V_T(\phi) = X$$. That is, the market price of $$X$$, $$C_0$$ is equal to $$V_0(\phi)$$. In the case where it is not equal, a party can make arbitrage from $$X$$. 
