Let us now delve deeper into the *necessary wealth* argument.

### Necessary Wealth

We have $$Y = \{Y_0, \dots, Y_T\}$$ representing the random variable for the payouts at each time $$t$$. We formulated that

$$
\begin{align*}
U_T := Y_T \\
U_{t - 1} := \max\left(\frac{1}{1 + r} \mathbb E^*(U_t \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1}), Y_{t - 1}\right)
\end{align*}
$$

for $$t = T, T - 1, \dots, 1$$. For each $$U_{t - 1}$$,

$$
\begin{align*}
U_{t - 1} &\geq \frac{1}{1 + r} \mathbb E^*(U_T \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1}) \\
U^*_{t - 1} & \geq \mathbb E^*(U_t^* \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1})
\end{align*}
$$

$$\{U_T^*: t = 0, 1, \dots, T\}$$ form a $$p^*$$-supermartingale. Also note that, $$U^*_t \geq Y^*_t$$ for $$t = 0, 1, \dots, T$$. It is called as a **Snell Envelope** of $$\{Y_t\}$$.

Consider the probability space $$(\Omega, \mathcal F, P)$$ with the event spaces $$(\mathcal F_t)_{t = 0}^T$$. Then, we have the following claim -

**Claim.** There does not exist a supermartingale $$(Z_t)$$ such that

1. $$Z_t \geq Y_t$$, for all $$t$$

2. $$Z_t = \max_{t \leq \tau \leq T} \mathbb E(Y_\tau \vert \mathcal F_t)$$  

3. The maximum in the above equation is attained at $$\tau^*(t) = \min(s \geq t: Z_s = Y_S) \wedge T$$

4. The random variables $$Z_{T \wedge \tau^*(0)}$$ for $$t = 0, 1, \dots, T$$ is a martingale.

***Proof.*** Define $$Z_t := \max_{t \leq \tau \leq T } \mathbb E(Y_T \vert \mathcal F_t)$$. We can compute $$Z_t$$ since it is a finite optimization problem. Since $$\{Y_t\}$$ form a martingale, we get

$$
Z_t \geq \mathbb[Y_T \vert \mathcal F_t] = Y_t
$$

We use this result to show that $$Z_t$$ form a supermartingale. Consider the stopping time $$\sigma$$ between $$t$$ and $$T$$. Then, for attaining maximum

$$
\begin{align*}
    Z_t &= \mathbb E[Y_\sigma \vert F_t ]\\
\mathbb E[Z_t \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1}] &= \mathbb E[\mathbb E[Y_\sigma \vert \mathcal F_t ] \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1}] \\
&= \mathbb E[Y_\sigma \vert \mathcal F_{t - 1}] \leq Z_{t - 1}
\end{align*}
$$

How do we now show that this is minimal? $$Z_t$$ being minimal implies that if $$Z_t$$ is a supermarginale majorant of $$\{Y_t\}$$, then $$X_t \geq Z_t$$ for all $$t$$. 

$$
\begin{align*}
    X_t(w) \geq Y_t(w) \forall t, \forall w \\
\implies X_{\tau(w)} (w) \geq Y_{\tau(w)}(w)
, \forall w\end{align*}
$$

Then, equivalently, $$X_\tau \geq Y_\tau$$ for $$t \leq \tau \leq T$$.

$$
\begin{align*}
X_t &\geq \mathbb E(X_t \vert \mathcal F_t) \geq \mathbb E[Y_T \vert \mathcal F_t] \\
&\geq \mathbb E[Y_T \vert \mathcal F_t], \forall t
\end{align*}
$$

Resulting in $$X_t \geq Z_t$$. So far, we have shown (1) and (2) in the claim. Also, in the above proof, we use the following property. Let $$X_t$$ be a supermartingale ifor $$t \leq \tau \leq T$$. Then $$\mathbb E(X_\tau \vert \mathcal F_t) \leq X_t$$. The proof is left as an exercise.

How do we show (3) and (4) in the claim. For (4), we simply need to check the martingale property

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[Z_{(t + 1) \wedge \bar \tau} - Z_{t \wedge \bar \tau} \vert \mathcal F_t] &\stackrel{?}{=} 0 \\
&= \mathbb E[\mathbb 1_{t < \bar \tau}(Z_{(t + 1) \wedge \bar \tau} - Z_{t \wedge \bar \tau} \vert \mathcal F_t] \\
&= \mathbb E[\mathbb 1_{t < \tau} (Z_{t + 1} = Z_t) \vert \mathcal F_t] \\
&= \mathbb 1_{t < \bar \tau} \left(\mathbb E(Z_{t + 1} \vert F_t) - Z_t\right) \\

\end{align*}
$$

where $$\bar \tau(w) = \tau^*(0) (w)$$. Now, rewriting the definition of $$Z_t$$, we get

$$
Z_t = \max \left(\mathbb E(Z_{T + 1} \vert \mathcal F_t, Y_t\right)
$$

meaning for $$t < \bar \tau \implies Z_t > Y_t$$ (from definition of $$\bar \tau$$ in (3)) implying $$Z_t = \mathbb E(Z_{t + 1} \vert \mathcal F_t)$$. This proves the required property.
