# Finite Market Models

The binomial model we have discussed previously is an example of a finite market model. These structures can be generalised to markets with multiple stocks, bonds and contingent claims. The price evolution need not be binary We shall derive results for pricing similarly like before for this general market. To do the analysis, the notation for probability space, portfolio, value, trading strategies and arbitrage has to be defined -

#### Probability Space
Again, we consider a finite probability space $$(\Omega, \mathcal F, P)$$, that is $$\#(\Omega)< \infty)$$ with $$\mathcal F = \mathcal P(\Omega)$$ (the power set) and $$P(A) = \sum_{w \in A} P(w), A \in \mathcal F$$. 

We shall assume that every event has a non-zero probability. If there are events with zero-probability, they are not relevant to our discussion and we can simply prune these points.

A **filtration** $$\mathcal F_0 \subset \mathcal F_1 \subset \cdots \subset \mathcal F_T$$ represents the history of the market or the evolution of prices of assets in the market. Typically, $$\mathcal F_T = \mathcal F$$.

#### Assets in portfolio
Now in this setup, we consider the assets - asset 0 bond and assets $$1, 2, \dots, d$$ stocks. At any time $$t$$, the prices are given by

$$
	S_t = (S^0_t, S^1_t, \dots, S^d_T), t = 0, 1, \dots, T
$$

Where $$S^0_t$$ is the bond-price and not random and $$S_t^U$$ for $$i > 0$$ represent the stock prices.

Each sequence $$\{S_t^i\}_{t = 0}^T$$ is $$\mathcal F_t measurable$$, that is $$(S_t)$$ is adapted to the filtration.

#### Trading strategy
After defining the prices and the structure of the portfolio, we define a *trading strategy* for this market - 

$$
	\phi = \{\phi_t: t = 1, \dots, T\}
$$

where $$\phi_t = (\phi_t^0, \phi_t^1, \dots \phi_t^d)$$ is a vector of holdings representing the assets held at time $$t$$. That is, $$\phi_t^I$$ is the number of shares of asset $$i$$ to be held on day $$t$$. 

The basic assumptions with our trading strategies are 
- The trading strategy is predictable - $$\phi_t^i \in \mathcal F_{t - 1}$$ for all $$i$$ and $$t = 1, 2, \dots, T$$.
- Self-financing - $$\phi_t \cdot S_t = \phi_{t + 1} \cdot S_t$$ (note that these are vector dot products $$\phi_t \cdot S_t = \sum_{i = 1}^d \phi_t^i S_t^i$$).

#### Value of the portfolio
The value of the portfolio at time $$t = 0$$ is given by $$V_0(\phi) = \phi_1 \cdot S_0$$ and for time $$t > 0$$, we have $$V_t(\phi) =  \phi_t \cdot S_t$$. For this market, the change in the value of portfolio across a day is given by $$\Delta V_t(\phi)$$

$$
\begin{align*}
	\Delta V_t(\phi) &:= V_t(\phi) - V_{t - 1}(\phi) \\
	&= \phi_t \cdot S_t - \phi_{t - 1}\cdot S_{t - 1} \\
	&= \phi_t \cdot (S_t - S_{t - 1}) \\
	&= \phi_t \cdot \Delta S_t
\end{align*}
$$

So the value at any time $$t$$ can now be defined as 

$$
\begin{align*}
V_t(\phi) &= V_0(\phi) + \sum_{u = 1}^t \sum_{i = 0}^d \phi_u^i \Delta S_u^i  \quad \quad\because \quad \text{Telescoping sum} \\
&=V_0(\phi) + \sum_{u = 1}^t \phi_u \cdot \Delta S_u
\end{align*}
$$

for $$t = 0, 1, \dots, T$$

To help us derive results in the later sections, we define the following notation for **discounted stock prices** -

$$
\begin{align*}
	S_t^*  &= S_t /S^0_t \\
	&= (1, S_t^{1*}, \dots, S_t^{d*})
\end{align*}
$$

It essentially divides the stock prices with the bond price at time $$t$$.  Similarly we can define discounted value of a portfolio.

We can derive that the telescopic sum property still holds with the discounted values for the portfolio. That is,

$$
	V_T^*(\phi) = V_0^*(\phi) + \sum_{u = 1}^t \phi_u \cdot \Delta S_u^* 
$$

where $$\Delta S_u^* = S_u^* - S_{u - 1}^*$$. This property will be useful for extracting Martingales from the price evolution tree. Specifically, we have the following lemma

**Lemma 1** If $$(M_t: t = 0, 1, \dots, T)$$ is a martingale and $$(H_1,H_2, \dots, H_T)$$ is a predictable sequence of random variables then 

$$
	X_t  := \sum_{u = 1}^T H_u \Delta M_u
$$

is a martingale!

#### Arbitrage
The expressions are very similar to before wherein an arbitrage opportunity (risk-free profit) is a trading strategy $$\phi$$ such that

$$
\begin{align*}
V_0(\phi) &= 0 \\
V_T(\phi) &\geq 0 \\
P(V_T(\phi) > 0) &> 0
\end{align*}
$$

The last condition essentially ensures that there is atleast one case where the profit is non-zero. Previously, we had used expectation to ensure this using the $$p^*$$ model derived using the binomial model. However, we want a general scenario here and an expectation requires an associated probability distribution.

The market is set to be **viable** if there are no arbitrage opportunities. We can show that the binomial model considered previously is viable if $$d < 1 + r < u$$. So, when is a market non-viable? Consider $$\Omega = \{w_1, w_2\}, T = 1, d = 2$$ with the stock price evolution $$S_0^0 = S_1^0 = 1$$, $$S_0^1 = S_0^2 = 1$$, and 

| |\( w_1 \) | \( w_2 \) |
|----------|----------|----------|
| \( S_1 \) | 1 | 2 |
| \( S_2 \) | 1 | 3 |

The trading strategy $$\phi = \{(0, -1, 1)\}$$ has $$V_1(\phi) \geq 0$$ in all entries and $$>0$$ in at least one entry.

Notice the subtleties in this example. Previously, in the CRR model, we focused on finding an arbitrage-free pricing. We ensured there is no arbitrage in the market with this design. However, considering a trading strategy with only stocks in a bullish market, there is always an opportunity for arbitrage.

For trading strategies with only stocks, the problem of finding a trading strategy boils down to solving some linear inequalities. 

## Martingale Measure
As noted earlier, we will assume that $$P(w) > 0$$ or each $$w \in \Omega$$.  For a new measure $$(\Omega, \mathcal F, Q)$$, we say that $$Q$$ is equivalent to $$P$$ ($$Q \sim P$$) if for all $$A \in \mathcal F$$

$$
	Q(A) > 0 \iff P(A) > 0
$$

With this infrastructure, we are aiming to find a new probability $$Q$$ (like $$p^*$$ in CRR model) to prove properties in a market. 

**Definition.** A probability $$Q$$ on $$(\Omega, \mathcal F)$$ is a **martingale measure** provided $$\{S_T^{i*}: t = 0, 1, \dots, T\}$$ is a $$Q-martingale$$ for each stock $$I = 1, \dots, d$$. 

An **equivalent martingale measure** is a probability $$Q$$ such that $$Q \sim P$$ and $$Q$$ is a martingale measure.
With these tools, we now define the first fundamental theorem of asset pricing.

## First Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing
A market is viable if and only if there exists at least one Equivalent Martingale Measure (EMM).

To understand this better, consider the previous example of a market that is not viable. Suppose we have a martingale measure $$Q$$, then

$$
	\mathbb E^Q(S_i^1) = S_0^i
$$

for $$I = 1, 2$$ using the martingale property. Letting $$a = Q(w_1), b = Q(w_2)$$, we get the linear equations

$$
	\left. \begin{align*}
		a + 2b &= 1\\
		a + 3b &= 1
	\end{align*} \right\} b = 0
$$

Since, $P(w_2) > 0 \not\imply Q(w_2) > 0$$, there cannot exist an Equivalent Martingale Measure in this market.

#### Proof 
($$\Longleftarrow$$) Let $$Q$$ be an EMM and $$\phi$$ is a strategy making an arbitrage. That is,
$$
	V_0(\phi) = 0, V_T(\phi) \geq 0
$$

Since $$\{S_t\}_{t = 1}^T$$ is a martingale under $$Q$$, the sequence $$\sum_{i = 1}^t \phi_u^I \cdot \Delta S_u^{i*}$$ for $$t = 0, 1, \dots, T$$ is a $$Q$$-martingale. 

$$
	\begin{align*}
		V^*_T(\phi) &:= V_T(\phi)/S_T^0 \\
		&= V_0^* + \sum_{u = 1}^T \phi_u \cdot \Delta S_u^* \\
		&= 0 + \sum_{u - 1}^T \sum_{i = 1}^d \phi_u^I \cdot \Delta S_u^{i*}
	\end{align*}
$$

$$V_t^*$$ is also a martingale under $$Q$$, implying $$\mathbb E^Q(V_T^*(\phi)) = \mathbb E^Q(V_0^*(\phi)) = 0$$. Since $$P \sim Q$$, $$P(V_T(\phi) > 0) = 0$$.
