We have seen that $$V_+(X) \geq V_-(X)$$ for a contingent claim $$X$$. 

- If $$C_0 > V_+(X)$$ then there is a seller's arbitrage. How? There exists a strategy $$\phi$$ such that $$V_T(\phi) \geq X$$ and $$V_0(\phi) = V_+(X) < C_0$$.

- Similarly. when $$C_0 < V_-(X)$$ there is a buyer's arbitrage.

**Theorem.** A contingent claim $$X$$ is replicable **if and only if** $$V_+(X) = V_-(X)$$

*Proof.* 

- ($$\implies$$) We saw that previously

- ($$\Longleftarrow$$) Assume $$V_+(X) = V_-(X)$$. Let $$\phi^+$$ be a trading strategy such that $$V_T(\phi^+) \geq X$$ and $$\phi^-$$ is such that $$V_T(\phi^-) \geq X$$. However, $$V_0(\phi^+) = V_+(X) = V_-(X) = V_0(\phi^-)$$ and consequently $$V_T(\phi^+) - V_T(\phi^-) \geq 0$$. Let $$Q \in M$$ be any martingale measure -
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
\mathbb E^Q(V_T^*(\phi^+) - V_T^*(\phi^-)) &= V_0^*(\phi^+) - V_0^*(\phi^-) \\
&= (V_0(\phi^+) - V_0(\phi^-))/S_0^0 = 0
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  Therefore, $$V_T(\phi^+) \equiv V_T^(\phi^-) \equiv X$$ implying that $$\phi^+$$ can be used to replicate $$X$$.
  
  Suppose $$X$$ is not replicable, then there is $$\phi$$ such that $$V_T(\phi) \leq X$$ and $$V_0(\phi) = V_+(X)$$. 
  
  **Claim.** $$P(V_T(\phi) < X) > 0$$. If it is equal to $$0$$, then $$V_T(\phi) \equiv X$$.
  
  So, any market price for $$X$$ with $$C_) \not \in (V_-(X), V_+(X))$$ yields an arbitrage.

**Theorem.** $$X$$ is replicable **if and only if** $$\mathbb E^Q(X)$$ is the same for all $$Q \in M$$.

*Proof*. 

- $$(\implies)$$ $$X = V_T(\phi)$$ then
  
  $$
  \mathbb E^Q(X) = \mathbb E^Q(V_T(\phi)) = V_0(\phi) \frac{S_T^0}{S_0^0}
  $$

- $$(\Longleftarrow)$$ Assume for contradition $$X$$ is not replicable. As we've constructed before, let $$L = \{V_T(\phi): \phi \text{ is a trading strategy}\}$$. Since $$X$$ is not replicable, $$X \not \in L$$. Let $$X = X_0 + Z$$ such that $$X_0 \in L$$ and $$Z \neq 0, \perp L$$. For any $$Q \in M$$, we define $$\tilde Q(w_k) = Q(w_k) + c Z_k$$. Again, we choose a $$c$$ such that $$\tilde Q > 0$$ and $$\tilde Q \in M$$. Then, since $$\mathbb E^Q(X)$$ is the same for all $$Q \in M$$, we have
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
\mathbb E^Q(X) &= \mathbb E^{\tilde Q}(X) \\
Q \cdot X &= \tilde Q \cdot X = Q \cdot X + c Z \cdot X \\
&\therefore Z \cdot X = 0
\end{align*}
  $$
  
   implying that $$X \in L$$ giving a contradiction.

### Dual Formulae

As a result of the above theorem, we can give alternate formulae to $$V_+(X)$$ and $$V_-(X)$$ (dual comes from linear programming)

$$
\begin{align*}
V_+(X) &= \sup \{\mathbb E^Q(X): Q \in M\} \\
V_-(X) &= \inf \{\mathbb E^Q(X) : Q \in M\}
\end{align*}
$$

# Random Walk

In this section, we shall extend our theory beyond finite market models, wherein the price evolution is described using a random walk. 

Let $$X_n = \xi_1 + \dots + \xi_n$$  where $$\mathbb E(\xi_k) = \mu$$ and $$\xi$$ are iid for $$n = 0, 1, 2, \dots$$. Let $$\mathcal F_n = \sigma(\xi_1, \dots, \xi_n)$$ and $$\mathcal F_n \perp \!\!\! \perp \xi+{n + k}$$ for $$k \geq 1$$. Then, consider set of random variables $$M_n = X_n - n \mu$$.

**Claim.** $$M_n$$ is a martingale with respect to $$\mathcal F_n$$. 

*Proof.*

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[M_{n + 1} \vert \mathcal F_n] &= \mathbb E[X_{n + 1} \vert \mathcal F_n] - (n + 1)\mu\\ 
&= \mathbb E[X_n + \xi_{n + 1} \vert \mathcal F_n]  - (n + 1)\mu\\
&= X_n + \mu - (n + 1)\mu = M_n
\end{align*}
$$

Assuming that $$var(\xi_k) = \sigma^2$$ is finite, consider $$Y_n = M_n^2 - n\sigma^2$$. 

**Claim.** $$Y_n$$ is a martingale with respect to $$\mathcal F_n$$ when $$\mu = 0$$

*Proof.* 

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[Y_{n + 1} \vert \mathcal F_n]&= \mathbb E[M^2_{n + 1} \vert \mathcal F_n] - (n + 1)\sigma^2\\
&= \mathbb E[(M_n + \xi_{n + 1})^2 \vert \mathcal F_n]  - (n + 1)\sigma^2\\
&= M_n^2 + M_n \mu + \sigma^2 - (n + 1)\sigma^2 =  Y_n
\end{align*}
$$

## Optional Stopping

Let $$\tau$$ be a random variable representing stopping time. Then, we have

$$
\mathbb E[M_\tau] = \mathbb E(M_0)
$$

provided $$\tau(w) \leq N$$. That is, $$M_{n \wedge \tau}$$ is a martingale.. 

### Single Random Walk

We have the following setup

$$
X_n = x + \xi_1 + \dots + \xi_n
$$

where $$\xi_k$$ are i.i.d. Let $$P(\xi= 1) = p$$ and $$P(\xi_k = -1) = q = 1 - p$$ where $$0 < p < 1$$. We then have

$$
\mu = 2p - 1, \sigma^2 = 1 - (2p - 1)^2
$$

Let $$\tau_b := \min(n \geq 0: X_n = b)$$ and $$\tau = \min(\tau_a, \tau_b)$$.

**Claim.** Suppose $$p > \frac{1}{2}$$ and $$\mu > 0$$ then

$$
\begin{align*}
P_x(\tau_b < \infty) = 1 \quad b \geq x \\
P_x(\tau_a < \infty) < 1\quad a < x
\end{align*}
$$

*Proof.* We construct a martingale of the form $$M_n = \alpha^{X_n} \beta^n$$ for some $$\alpha > 0$$.
