# Brownian Motion (Wiener Process)

Brownian motion is defined as a stochastic process defined on continuous time - $$W = (W_t, t \geq 0)$$. It is defined on a probability space $$(\Omega, \mathcal F, P)$$ and has the following properties -

- The initial value is assumed to be $$W_0 = 0$$

- **Independent increments** - Given a set of times $$t_0, \dots, t_n$$ such that $$0 = t_0 <t_1 < \cdots < t_n$$ then $$W_{t_1} - W_{t_0}, \dots, W_{t_{n}} - W_{t_{n - 1}}$$ are independent.

- **Gaussian increments** - For $$0 \leq s \leq t$$, $$W_t - W_s \sim \mathcal N(0, t - s)$$.

- For a fixed $$\omega \in \Omega$$, the function $$t \to W_t(\omega)$$ is continuous.

Equivalently, a Brownian motion is a stochastic process $$(w_t: t \geq 0)$$ is a Gaussian process with $$\mathbb E(W_t) = 0, cov(W_s, W_t) = s \wedge t$$ for all $$s, t$$ and $$t \to W_t$$ is continuous.

This is equivalent to the third property, for $$s < t$$, 

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[W_sW_t] &= \mathbb E[W_s(W_s + (W_t - W_s)]  \\
&= \mathbb E[W_s^2] + \mathbb E[W_s(W_t - W_s)] \\
\end{align*}
$$

since $$W_s - W_0$$ is a Gaussian distribution and independent increments property,

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[W_sW_t] &= \mathbb E[W_s^2] + \mathbb E[W_s(W_t - W_s)] \\
&= s^2 + \mathbb E[W_s]\mathbb E[W_t - W_s] = s^2
\end{align*}
$$

### Symmetries

Brownian motion is a unique stochastic process that has some symmetry properties. That is, transformations that yield a Brownian motion when applied on a Brownian motion. Let $$(W_t)$$ be a Brownian motion, then the so are the following

- **Scaling** - $$\frac{1}{\sqrt{c}} W_{ct}$$ for $$c> 0$$

- **Reflection** - $$-W_t$$

- **Time Inversion** - $$tW_{1/t}$$ with $$\lim_{t \to 0} tW_{1/t} = 0$$

- **Time Shift** - $$\tilde W_t = W_{t + s} - W_s$$, $$t\geq 0$$ for a fixed $$s$$. This comes in handy to define Markov processes.

- **Time Reversal** - For a $$T > 0$$, $$\tilde W_t = \tilde W_{T - t} - W_T$$ for $$0 \leq t \leq T$$.

### More Properties

- Define the sigma field $$\mathcal F_s:=\sigma(W_u : 0 \leq u \leq s)$$, then $$(W_{t + s} - W_s)_{t \geq 0} \perp\!\!\!\perp F_s$$ - This is the Markov Property for Brownian Motion.
  
  Brownian paths are not smooth
  
  $$
  W_{t + h - W_t} = \mathcal O(\sqrt{h})
  $$
  
  roughly whereas if $$f$$ is a $$C'$$ function,
  
  then $$f(t + h) - f(t) = \mathcal O(h)$$. $$\sqrt{h} \gg h$$ as $$h \to 0$$. A Brownian motion path has a property called *fractal* and it is nowhere differentiable.
  
  Also,
  
  $$
  \sum_{k = 1}^{2^n} [W(k2^{-n} t) - W((k - 1)2^{-n} t]^2 \to t
  $$
  
  as $$n \to \infty$$. For a smooth function $$f$$, doing the same thing yields $$2^{-n}t \to 0$$. This observation forms one of the fundamental building blocks for stochastic calculus.

- Another peculiar property of Brownian motion has is -
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  \frac{W_t}{t} &\to 0 \\
  \lim_{t \to \infty} \sup W_t &= \infty \\
  

\lim_{t \to \infty} \inf W_t &= -\infty \\
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  

- Since Brownian motion is basically the continuous version of random walks, it has some Martingale properties. Specifically, the following processes are martingales
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
W_t \\
W_t^2 - t \\
\exp\left(zW_t - z^2t /2\right) \text{ for } z \in \mathbb C 
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  The last result comes from the properties of moment generating functions - for a random variable $$X \sim \mathcal N(0, 1)$$, we get $$\mathbb E(e^{zX}) = e^{z^2/2}$$. Then,
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
\mathbb E(e^{zW_t} \vert \mathcal F_s) &= \mathbb E(e^{zWs} e^{z(W_t - W_s)} \vert \mathcal F_s) \\
&= e^{zW_s} \mathbb E(e^{z(W_t - W_s)}) = e^{zW_s} e^{z^2 (t - s)/2}
\end{align*}
  $$

- Wiener also studied the integration properties for Brownian motion
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
M_t^f = \int_0^t f(u) dW_u = W_t f(t) - \int_0^t W_u f'(u) du
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  for a $$f \in C'$$ and non-random. The above expression comes from *integration by parts* and is called as the **Wiener's integral**. <u>Also, $$M_t^f$$ is a martingale</u> (This is easy to show).

- **Doob's inequality** - Let $$(M_t)$$ be a martingale with right-continuous paths. Then, for each $$t > 0$$,
  
  $$
  \mathbb E[\sup_{0 \leq s \leq t} M_s^2] \leq 4\mathbb E[M_t^2]
  $$

- **Passage times** - Let $$\tau_b = \min(t: W_t = b)$$, then
  
  $$
  \mathbb E_x(e^{-\alpha \tau_b}) = \exp(-\sqrt{2\alpha} \vert b - x\vert)
  $$
  
  where $$\mathbb E_x$$ means we use $$x + W_t$$ (we are changing the initial mean value of $$W_t$$). 
  
  *Proof.* Fix $$\lambda > 0$$ and $$x < b$$. Since $$\exp(\lambda W_{t \wedge \tau_b} - \lambda^2(t \wedge \tau_b)/2)$$ is a martingale, and is $$\leq e^{\lambda b}$$, we get
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
e^{\lambda x} &= \mathbb E_x(e^{\lambda W_{t \wedge \tau_b} - \lambda^2/2 (t \wedge \tau_b)}) \\
&\text{as } t\to \infty \implies \mathbb E_x(e^{\lambda W_{\tau_b} - \lambda^2/2\tau_b}) \quad \because \text{Dominated Convergence Theorem} \\
&= e^{\lambda b} \mathbb E_x(e^{-\lambda^2/2 \tau_b})
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  Taking $$\lambda = \sqrt{2\alpha}$$, we get the statement of the theorem. Observe that when $$\alpha \to 0$$, the RHS becomes $$1$$. Therefore, $$P_x(\tau_b < \infty) = 1$$ as $$\alpha \to 0$$. That is, Brownian motion will eventually get to any level!

- **Wiener's integral** - Formally,
  
  $$
  M_t^f := f(t) W_t - \int_0^t w_s f'(s)ds
  $$
  
  It is useful to know the distribution of this process. Thinking of the above integral as Riemann's sum, we can see that $$M_t^f$$ has the distribution $$\mathcal N(0, \sigma^2)$$. The variance is calculated as
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
\mathbb E[(M_t^f)^2 ] &= f(t)^2 t + \underbrace{\int_0^t \int_0^t (u \wedge v) f'(u) f'(v) du dv}_{(2)} - \underbrace{2f(t) \int_0^t uf'(u) du}_{(3)} \\
(2) &\implies 2\int_0^t \left(\int_0^u f'(v) dv \right) u f'(u) du  \quad\because \text{ by symmetry}\\
&= 2\int_0^t [f(t) - f(u) ]u f'(u) du \\
(2) + (3) &\implies -2\int_0^t uf(u)f'(u) du \\
&= -t f(t)^2 + \int_0^t f(u)^2 du \\
\mathbb E[(M_t^f)^2 ] &= \int_0^t [f(u)]^2 du
\end{align*}
  $$
  
  This is a very useful result. In fact, using two different functions -
  
  $$
  M_t^f M_t^g - \int_0^t f(u)g(u) du
  $$
  
  is also a martingale! An easier way to show this would be using **polarization** - manipulate $$(M_t^f + M_t^g )^2 - (M_t^f - M_t^g)^2$$. Also, $$M_t^f \pm M_t^g = M_t^{f \pm g}$$.
