---

A tame trading strategy $$\phi$$ there exists $$c > 0$$ , $$V_t^*(\phi) \geq -c$$, $$\forall t \in [0, T]$$.

Consequently, $$V_t^*(\phi) + c \implies V_t^*(\phi)$$ is a $$Q$$-supermartingale.

**Proposition** - If there is an ELMM $$Q$$ then no tame trading strategy can be an arbitrage.
*Proof.* Suppose you have a tame trading strategy with $$V_T^*(\phi) \geq 0$$ and $$V_0^*(\phi) = 0$$. Due to supermartingale property,

$$
\begin{align*}
E^Q(V_T^*(\phi)) &\leq \mathbb E^Q(V_0^*(\phi)) \\
&= V_0(\phi) = 0
\end{align*}
$$

**Theorem. (FFTAP)** 

- No free lunch with vanishing risk$$\iff$$ there exists an ELMM

ELMM via Girsanov’s theorem - For any $$Q \sim P$$ there exists a $$\Lambda_t$$, such that $$\left. \frac{dP}{DQ} \right\vert_{\mathcal F_t} = \Lambda_t$$. This is equivalent to saying

$$
Q(A) = \mathbb E^P(\mathbb 1_A \Lambda_t)
$$

For all $$A \in \mathcal F_t$$. Here, $$\Lambda_t$$ is a $$P$$-martingale. We want the form $$\Lambda_t = \exp(M_t - \frac{1}{2}\langle M\rangle_t))$$ for the Girsanov’s theorem. Consider the following - Using Ito’s theorem

$$
d(\log(\Lambda_t)) = \frac{1}{\Lambda_t}{d \Lambda_t} + \frac{1}{2} \frac{1}{\Lambda_t^2} d\langle\Lambda\rangle_t
$$

Resembling that $$dM_t = \frac{1}{\Lambda_t} d\Lambda_t$$.

Using Martingale representation theorem, $$M_t = - \int_0^t \theta_s \cdot dW_s$$. With $$Q = \exp(M_T - \frac{1}{2} \langle M\rangle_T)P$$, Girsanov’s theorem gives us 

$$
\tilde W_t = W_t + \int_0^t \theta_s ds
$$

is a $$Q$$-Brownian motion. Going back to our Black-Scholes model,

$$
S_t^{i,*} = S_0^i \exp(\int_0^t \sigma_s^i\cdot dW_s - \frac{1}{2} \int_0^t \vert \sigma_s^i\vert^2 ds + \int_0^t (\mu_s^i - r_s) ds)
$$

We want to choose $$\theta$$ such that $$\tilde W_s$$ captures the drift term. That is, let $$-\sigma_s^i \cdot \theta_s + \mu_s^i - r_s = 0$$, then

$$
S^{i,*}_t = S_0^I \exp(\int_0^t \sigma_s^i \cdot d \tilde W_s - \frac{1}{2} \int_0^t \vert \sigma_s^i \vert^2 ds)
$$

Simply put, we are trying to find a $$Q$$-martingale given $$\sigma_s^i, \mu_s^i, r_s$$ for all $$\omega, s$$ in terms of $$\theta_s$$. In other words, we are checking if $$\mu_s - r_s {\bf 1}$$ is in the column span of $$\sigma_s$$.  We are working our way backwards to find an ELMM $$Q$$ using the Black-Scholes model. Using $$\theta_s$$, we get $$(\Lambda)_t$$. But when is this a $$P$$-martingale? A super-martingale with same initial and final expectations is a martingale.

**Novikov’s condition** - If $$\mathbb E^p[e^{\frac{1}{2} \langle M\rangle_T}] < \infty$$, then $$\Lambda_t = \exp(M_t - \frac{1}{2} \langle M\rangle_t)$$ for all $$0 \leq t \leq T$$ is a $$P$$-martingale.

**Theorem.** If $$n = d$$, and $$\sigma_s$$ is invertible for all $$\omega, s$$ and $$\mathbb E^p [e^{\frac{1}{2} \in_0^t \vert \theta_s\vert^2 ds}] < \infty$$, then $$Q$$ is an ELMM.