Let us delve into an example to understand this better - consider the calculation for $\mathbb E[W_T^4 \vert \mathcal  F_t]$ Note that this process is a martingale. Now, we present two methods to perform this calculation -

#### Method 1

We say that this expression is equivalent to evaluating a martingale function - $= f(W_t, t)$. We need the property $= f(W_t, t) = \mathbb E[W_T^4 \vert \mathcal F_t]$, and we choose $f(x, t) = x^4 + 6x^2(T - t) + 3(T - t)^2$ so that it has the following property -

$$
\begin{align*}
    f_x &= 4x^2 + 12x(T - t) \\
    f_{xx} &= 12x^2 + 12(T - t) \\
f_t &= -6x^2 - 6(T - t) 
\end{align*}
$$

We observe that $f_t + \frac{1}{2} f_{xx} = 0$. From Ito's formula

$$
f(W_t,t) = f(0, 0) + \int_0^t f_x dW_s + \underbrace{\int_0^t f_t ds + \int_0^r \frac{1}{2} f_{xx} ds}_{= 0}
$$

Therefore, $f(W_t, t)$ is a local martingale. We can check that the integrand $f_{xx} = 4W_s^3 + 2W_s(T - s)$ does not integrate to infinite (is a finite value), and consequently, $f(W_t, t)$ is a martingale.

We see that $M_T = W_T^4$. Let the process $ N_t =\mathbb E[W_T^4 \vert \mathcal F_t]$ - this by itself is also a martingale.  Consider the following lemma -

**Lemma.** Suppose $M_t$ and $N_t$ are martingales with right continuous paths and $M_t = N_T$ a.s., then $P(M_t = N_t, \forall t \in [0, T]) = 1$.

*Proof.* $M_t = \mathbb E[M_T \vert \mathcal F_t] = \mathbb E[N_t \vert \mathcal F_t] = N_t   $

This implies that $M_t$ and $N_t$ agree on all rational times (the way we define martingales for Brownian motions). However, since the processes are right continuous , we get

$$
M_t(w) = \lim_{s \downarrow t, s \in Q} M_s(w) = \lim_{s \downarrow t, s \in Q}N_s(w) = N_t(w)
$$

for an arbitrary $t \in [0, T]$.

#### Method 2

Consider the Ito's formula for $W_t^4$

$$
\begin{align*}
W_t^4 &= \int_0^t 4W_s^2 dWs + \int_0^t 6W_s^2 ds \\
\mathbb E[W_u^2 \vert \mathcal F_t] &= W_t^2 + u - t, t < u \\
\mathbb E[W_T^2 \vert \mathcal F_t] &= \underbrace{\int_0^t 4W_s^2 dWs}_{\text{Martingale}} + \int_0^t 6W_s^2 ds + \mathbb E\left[\int_0^T 6W_s^2 ds \vert \mathcal F_t\right] \\
&= W_t^4 + \int_t^T 6\mathbb E[W_s^2 \vert \mathcal F_t] \quad \because \text{Fubini's theorem} \\
&= W_t^4 + 6\int_t^T [W_t^2 + s - t] ds \\
&= W_t^4 + 6W_t^2(T - t) + 3(T - t)^2
\end{align*}
$$

Both boil down to the same sort of an expression that satisfy the heat equation! But how do we guess the $f(., .)$ in the first method?

---

Okay, now suppose we have an arbitrary function $g$ and we have to calculate $\mathbb E[g(W_T) \vert \mathcal F_t]$. We can do the following -

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb E[g(W_t + (W_T - W_t)) \vert \mathcal F_t ] = E[g(x + z\sqrt{T - t})]\vert_{x = W_t}
\end{align*}
$$

Since $W_T - W_t$ is independent of $\mathcal F_t$ and $W_t$ is known at $\mathcal F_t$, we can remove the conditionality in the expectation! 

Then, we say $\mathbb [g(x + \sqrt{T - t} x]\vert_{x = W_t} = f(W_t, t)$. For $g(x) = x^4$, we can expand the binomial expression to get $f$. Furthermore,

$$
\begin{align*}
f(x, t) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} g(y) p_{T - t} (x, y) dy
\end{align*}
$$

where $p_u(x, y) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi u}} e^{(y - x)^2/2u}$ . This satisfies the heat equation, namely

$$
\frac{\partial p_u}{\partial u} = \frac{1}{2} \frac{\partial^2 p_u}{\partial x^2}, \quad \forall y
$$

and consequently we can check that the **dual** is satisfied for $f$ as well!

$$
\frac{\partial f}{\partial u} + \frac{1}{2} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x^2}= 0
$$

resulting in $f(W_t, t)$ always being a martingale!

This works for any $g$ that does not grow too fast (polynomial growth - sufficient not necessary), and it does not have anything to do with smoothness of $g$ either!

Also, $\lim_{t \uparrow T} f(x, t) = g(x)$ as long as $g$ is continuous at $x$.

---

This indeed is a very powerful result. Let us see how it can be used. Consider another example - Suppose we have $\mu = r = 0$, and a $\sigma$ for a price process $S_t$ of the form $S_t = S_0 \exp\left(\sigma W_t - \sigma^2 t/2\right)$. Let the contingent claim be

$$
X = g\left(\underbrace{\int_0^t S_t dt}_{I_T}\right)
$$

That is, the contingent claim is on the total value is a function of the total value accumulated till time $T$. 

Now, $\mathbb E[g(I_T) \vert \mathcal F_t]$ is calculated as -

$$
\begin{align*}
I_T &= I_t + \int_t^T S_0 \exp(\sigma W_u - \sigma^2 u /2)du \\
&= I_t + S_0\exp(\sigma (W_t + (W_u - W_t)) - \sigma^2 u /2)du \quad \because \text{similar trickas before} \\
&= I_t + S_0 e^{\sigma W_t} \int_0^T e^{\sigma (W_u - W_t)} e ^{-\sigma^2 u} du \\
&= I_t  + S_0e^{\sigma W_t} \int_0^{T - t} e^{\sigma \hat W_s} e^{-\sigma^2 s/2} ds \quad \because \hat W_s = W_{t + s} - W_t, s = u - t \\
&= I_t + S_t \underbrace{\int_0^{T - t} e^{\sigma \hat W_s } e^{-\sigma^2 s/2}}_{\perp\!\!\!  \perp\mathcal F_t}

\end{align*}
$$

So, $\mathbb E[g(I_t) \vert \mathcal F_t] = \psi(S_t, I_t, t)$ where $\psi(x, y, t) = \mathbb E[g(y + x \int_0^{T - t} S_s)]$ if $S_0 = 1$. The closed form expression depends on $g$ in this case. Again, using Ito's formula on $\psi(S_t, I_t,t)$ we get

$$
\psi(S_t, I_t, t) = \psi(S_0, 0, 0) + \int_0^t \psi_i'(S_u, I_u, u)dS_u + \int_0^t \psi_2' S_u du + \int_0^t \psi_3'di + \frac{1}{2} \int_0^t \psi_1'' \sigma^2 S_u^2 du
$$
