# Lecture 01 

>  `03/01/2022`

# ~Chapter 1: Introduction

- **Embedded databases** - Databases which don't have high amount of concurrent access, but is mostly used by a single user. These databases are implemented by SQLite in general.
- Motivation for Database systems -

  - Atomicity
  - Concurrency
  - Security
  - ...

## Data Models 

A collection tools for describing the data, relationships in the data, semantics and other constraints.

We start using the relational models that are implemented using SQL. Then, we shall study Entity-Relationship data model. These are used for database design. We will briefly touch upon Object-based data models. Finally, we shall see Semi-structured data model as a part of XML. 

There are also other models like Network model and Hierarchical model (old) etc.

## Relational Model

All the data is stored in various tables. A **relation** is nothing but a table. Back in the 70’s, Ted Codd (Turing Award 1981) formalized the Relational Model. According to his terminology, a table is same as a *relation*, a column is also called an *attribute*, and the rows of the table are called as *tuples*. The second major contribution he made was introducing the notion of operations. Finally, he also established a low-level database engine that could execute these operations. 

Some more terminology - **Logical Schema** is the overall logical structure of the database. It is analogous to the type information of a variable in a program. A **physical schema** is the overall physical structure of the database. An **instance** is the actual content of the database at a particular point in time. It is analogous to the value of a variable. The notion of **physical data independence** is the ability to modify the physical schema without changing the logical schema.

### Data Definition Language (DDL)

It is the specification notation for defining the database schema. DDL compiler generates a set of table templates stored in a *data dictionary*. A data dictionary contains metadata (data about data) such as database schema, integrity constraints (primary key) and authorization.

### Data Manipulation Language (DML)

It is the language for accessing and updating the data organized by the appropriate data model. It is also known as a *query language*. There are basically two types of data-manipulation languages - **Procedural DML** requires a user to specify what data is needed and how to get that data; **Declarative DML** requires a user to specify what data is need without specifying how to get those data. Declarative/non-procedural DMLs are usually easier to learn. 

### SQL Query Language

SQL query language is **non-procedural**! It is declarative. SQL is **not** a Turing machine equivalent language. There are extensions which make it so. SQL does not support actions such as input from the users, typesetting, communication over the network and output to the display. A query takes as input several tables and always returns a single table. SQL is often used embedded within a higher-level language.

**Database Design** involves coming up with a Logical design and Physical design.

A **Database Engine** accepts these queries and parses them. It is partitioned into modules that deal with each of the responsibilities of the overall system. The functional components of a database system can be divided into

- Storage manager - Actually stores the data. It takes the logical view and maps it to the physical view. It is also responsible to interact with the OS file manager for efficient storing, retrieving and updating of data. It has various components such as authorization and integrity manager, transaction manager, file manager and buffer manager. It implements several data structures as a part of the physical system implementation - data files, data dictionary and indices.

- Query processor - It includes DDL interpreter, DML compiler (query to low-level instructions along with query optimization) and the query evaluation engine.

  Query processing involves parsing and translation, optimization, and evaluation. Statistics of the data are also used in optimization.

- Transaction management - A **transaction** is a collection of operations that performs a single logical function in a database application. The **transaction management component** ensures that the database remains in a consistent state despite system failure. The **concurrency control manager** controls the interaction among the concurrent transactions to ensure the consistency of the data.

