# Lecture 03 `06/01/2022`

## Relational Algebra

TODO - Define

Six basic operators -

- select $$\sigma$$
- project $$\Pi$$
- union $$\cup$$
- set difference $$-$$
- cartesian product $$\times$$
- rename $$\rho$$

### Select Operation

The **select** operation selects tuples that satisfy a given predicate. The notation is given by $$\sigma_p(r)$$.

### Project Operation

A unary operation that returns its argument relation, with certain attributes left out. That is, it gives a subset of attributes of tuples. The notation is given by $$\Pi_{attr_1, attr_2, ...}(r)$$

### Composition of Relation Operations

The result of a relational-algebra is a relation and therefore  we different relational-algebra operations can be grouped together to form <u>relational-algebra expressions</u>.

### Join Operation

To perform this operation, we first take the cartesian product of the two tables. Then, we use the select condition to select the relevant (rational) tuples. 

The **join** operation allows us to combine a select operation and a Cartesian-Product operation into a single operation. The join operation $$r \bowtie_\theta s = \sigma_\theta (r \times s)$$ 

### Union operation

This operation allows us to combine two relations. The notation is $$ r \cup s$$. For this operation to be vald, we need the following two conditions -

- $$r, s$$ must have the same **arity** (the same number of attributes in a tuple).
- The attribute domains must be <u>compatible</u>. 

> Why second?

### Set-Intersection Operation

This operator allows us to find tuples that are in both the input relations. The notations is $$r \cap s$$.

### Set Difference Operation

It allows us to find the tuples that are in one relation but not in the other.

> Notion of relation?

### The assignment Operation

The assignment operation is denoted by $$\leftarrow$$ and works like the assignment in programming languages. It is used to define temporary relation variables for convenience. With the assignment operation, a query can be written as a sequential program consisting of a series of assignments followed by an expression whose value is displayed as the result of the query.

### The rename Operation

The expression $$\rho_x(E)$$ is used to rename the expression $$E$$ under the name $$x$$. Another form of the rename operator is given by $$\rho_{x(A1, A2, ...)}(E)$$.

> Difference between rename and assignment? Is assignment used to edit tuples in a relation?

Are these set of relational operators enough for Turing completeness? No! Check [this](https://www.quora.com/Turing-Completeness/Why-is-relational-algebra-not-Turing-complete#:~:text=Relational%20algebra%20clearly%20doesn't,analysis%20such%20as%20query%20optimizers.) link for more info.

### Aggregate Functions

We need functions such as `avg`, `min`, `max`, `sum` and `count` to operate on the multiset of values of a column of a relation to return a value. Functions such as `avg` and `sum` cannot be written using FOL or the relations we defined above. Functions such as `min` and `max` can be written using a series of queries but it is impractical. The other way of implementing this is to use the following
$$
\Pi_{mark}(marks) - \Pi_{m1.mark}(\sigma_{m1.mark > m2.mark} \\ 
(\rho_{m1}(marks) \times \rho_{m2}(marks)))
$$
However, this definitive expression is very inefficient as it turns a linear operation to a quadratic operation.

**Note.** The aggregates **do not** filter out the duplicates!

### Group By Operation

This operation is used to group tuples based on a certain attribute value. 

## Equivalent Queries

There are more ways to write a query in relation algebra. Queries which are <u>equivalent</u> need not be <u>identical</u>.

In case of SQL, the database optimizer takes care of optimizing equivalent queries.

# ~Chapter 3: Basic SQL

TODO - basic defn

## Domain Types in SQL

- `char(n)` - Fixed length character string, with user-specified length $$n$$. We might need to use the extra spaces in the end in the queries too!
- `varchar(n)` - Variable length strings
- ...

##  Create Table Construct

An SQL relation is defined using the create table command - 

```sql
create table r
	(A_1, D_1, A_2, D_2, ..., A_n, D_n)
```

## Integrity Constraints in Create Table

Types of integrity constraints

- primary key $$(A_1, A_2, A_3, ...)$$
- Foreign key $$(A_m, ..., A_n)$$ references r
- not `null`

SQL prevents any update to the database that violates an integrity constraint.