# Lecture 04 

> `10-01-22`

## Basic Query Structure

- A typical SQL query has the form:

```sql
select A1, A2, ..., An
from r1, r2, ..., rm
where P
```

where, $$A_i$$ are attributes, $$r_i$$ are relations, and $$P$$ has conditions/predicates. The result of an SQL query is a relation. SQL is case-insensitive in general.

- We shall be using PostgreSQL for the rest of the course.
- SQL names are usually case insensitive. Some databases are case insensitive even in string comparison!

### select clause

- To force the elimination of duplicates, insert the keyword `distinct` after select. Duplicates come from 
  1. Input itself is a multiset
  2. Joining tables
  
  Removing duplicates imposes an additional overhead to the database engine. Therefore, it was ubiquitously decides to exclude duplicates removal in SQL. 
  
- The keyword `all` specifies that duplicates should not be removed.

- SQL allows renaming relations and attributes using the `as` clause. We can skip `as` in some databases like Oracle. Also, some databases allow queries with no `from` clause.

### from clause

If we write `select * from A, B`, then the Cartesian product of `A` and `B` is considered. This usage has some corner cases but are rare.

 ### as clause

It can be used to rename attributes as well as relations.

### Self Join

How do we implement various levels of recursion without loops and only imperative statements? Usually, `union` is sufficient for our purposes. However, this is infeasible in case of large tables or higher levels of hierarchy.

### String operations

SQL also includes string operations. The operator `like` uses patterns that are describes using two special character - `percent %` - Matches any substring and `underscore _` matches any character (Use `\` as the escape character). Some databases even fully support regular expressions. Most databases also support `ilike` which is case-insensitive.

### Set operations

These include `union`, `intersect` and `except` (set difference). To retain the duplicates we use `all` keyword after the operators.

### null values

It signifies an unknown value or that a value does not exist. The result of any arithmetic expression involving `null` is `null`.  The predicate `is null` can be used to check for null values.