# Lecture 5

### Aggregate Functions

The `having` clause can be used to select groups which satisfies certain conditions. Predicates in the `having` clause are applied after the formation of groups whereas predicates in the `where` clause are applied before forming the groups.

## Nested subqueries

SQL provides a mechanism for the nesting of subqueries. A subquery is a select-from-where expression that is nested within another query. The nesting can be done in the following ways -

- `from` clause - The relation can be replaced by any valid subquery
- `where` clause - The predicate can be replaced with an expression of the form `B <operation> (subquery)` where `B` is an attribute and `operation` will be defined later.
- **Scalar subqueries** - The attributes in the `select` clause can be replaced by a subquery that generates a single value!

### subqueries in the `from` clause

the `with` clause provides a way of defining a temporary relation whose definition is available only to the query in which the `with` clause occurs. For example, consider the following

```sql
with max_budget(value) as 
	(select max(budget))
	from department)
select department.name from department, max_budget
where department.budget = max_budget.value
```

We can write more complicated queries. For example, if we want all departments where the total salary is greater than the average of the total salary at all departments.

```sql
with dept_total(dept_name, value) as
	(select dept_name, sum(salary) from instructor group by dept_name)
		dept_total_avg(value) as
		(select avg(value) from dept_total)
    select dept_name
    from dept_total, dept_total_avg
    where dept_total.value > dept_total_avg.value
```

### subqueries in the `where` clause

We use operations such as `in` and `not in`. We can also check the set membership of a subset of attributes in the same order. There is also a `some` keyword that returns a True if at least one tuple exists in the subquery that satisfies the condition. Similarly we have the `all` keyword. There is also the `exists` clause which returns True if the tuple exists in the subquery relation. For example, if we want to find all courses taught in both the Fall 2017 semester and in the spring 2018 semester. We can use the following

```sql
select course_id from section as S
where semester = 'Fall' and year = 2017 and
	exists (select * from section as T
			where semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018
			and S.course_id = T.course_id)
```

Here, `S` is the correlation name and the inner query is the correlated subquery. Correspondingly, there also is a `not exists` clause.

The `unique` construct tests whether a subquery has any duplicate tuples in its result. It evaluates to True if there are no duplicates.

### Scalar Subquery

Suppose we have to list all the departments along with the number of instructors in each department. Then, we can do the following

```sql
select dept_name, 
	(select count(*) from instructor
	where department.dept_name = instructir.dept_name as num_instructors
	) from department;
```

There would be a **runtime error** if the subquery returns more than one result tuple.

## Modification of the database

We can

- delete tuples from a given relation using `delete from`. It deletes all tuples without a `where` clause. We need to be careful while using delete. For example, if we want to delete all instructors whose salary is less than the average salary of instructors. We can implement this using a subquery in the `where` clause. The problem here is that the average salary changes as we delete tuples from instructor. The solution for this problem is - we can compute average first and then delete without recomputation. This modification is usually implemented.

- insert new tuples into a give relation using `insert into <table> values <A1, A2, ..., An>`. The `select from where` statement is evaluated fully before any of its results are inserted into the relation. This is done to prevent the problem mentioned in `delete`.

- update values in some tuples in a given relation using `update <table> set A1 = ... where ...`. We can also use a `case` statement to make non-problematic sequential updates. For example,

  ```sql
  update instructor
  	set salary = case
  					when salary <= 1000 then salary *1.05
  					else salary*1.03
                  end
  ```

**`coalesce`** takes a series of arguments and returns the first non-null value.