# Lecture 6 

> `13-01-22`

# ~Chapter 4: Intermediate SQL

**Join operations** take two relations and return as a result another relation. There are three types of joins which are described below.

### Natural Join

Natural join matches tuples with the same values for **all common attributes**, and retains only one copy of each common column.

> Can't do self-join using this?

However, one must be beware of natural join because it produces unexpected results. For example, consider the following queries

```sql
-- Correct version
select name, title from student natural join takes, course
where takes.course_id = course.course_id
-- Incorrect version
select name, title
from student natural join takes natural join course
```

The second query omits all pairs where the student takes a course in a department other than the student’s own department due to the attribute department name. Sometimes, we don’t realize some attributes are being equated because all the common attributes are equated.

### Outer join

One can lose information with inner join and natural join. Outer join is an extension of the join operation that avoids loss of information. It computes the join and then adds tuples from one relation that do not match tuples in the other relation to the result of the join. Outer join uses `null` to fill the incomplete tuples. We have variations of outer join such as left-outer join, right-outer join, and full outer join. Can outer join be expressed using relational algebra? Yes, think about it. In general, $$(r ⟖ s) ⟖ t \neq r ⟖ (s ⟖t)$$.

**Note.** $$(r ⟖ s) ⟕ t \neq r ⟖ (s⟕t)$$. Why? Consider the following

```
r | X | Y | s | Y | Z | t | Z | X | P |
  | 1 | 2 |   | 2 | 3 |   | 3 | 4 | 7 |
  | 1 | 3 |   | 3 | 4 |   | 4 | 1 | 8 |
-- LHS				-- RHS
| X | Y | Z | P |	| X | Y | Z | P |
| 1 | 2 | 3 | - |	| 4 | 2 | 3 | 7 |
| 1 | 3 | 4 | 8 |	| 1 | 3 | 4 | 8 |
```

## Views

In some cases, it is not desirable for all users to see the entire logical model. For example, if a person wants to know the name and department of instructors without the salary, then they can use

```sql
create view v as select name, dept from instructor
```

A view provides a mechanism to hide certain data from the view of certain users. The view definition is not the same as creating a new relation by evaluating the query expression. Rather, a view definition causes the saving of an expression; the expression is substituted into queries using the view.

One view may be used in the expression defining another view. A view relation $$v_1$$ is said to *depend directly* on a view relation $$v_2$$ if $$v_2$$ is used in the expression defining $$v_1$$. It is said to *depend on* $$v_2$$ if there is a path of dependency. A *recursive* view depends on itself.

### Materialized views

Certain database systems allow view relations to be physically stored. If relations used in the query are updated, the materialized view result becomes out of date. We need to maintain the view, by updating the view whenever the underlying relations are updated. Most SQL implementations allow updates only on simple views. 

## Transactions

A transaction consists of a sequence of query and/or update statements and is atomic. The transaction must end with one of the following statements - 

-  **Commit work** - Updates become permanent
- **Rollback work** - Updates are undone

## Integrity Constraints

- `not null`
- `primary key (A1, A2, ..., Am)`
- `unique (A1, A2, ..., Am)`
- `check (P)`

### `check` clause

The **check(P)** clause specifies a predicate P that must be satisfied by every tuple in a relation. 

### Cascading actions

When a referential-integrity constraint is violated, the normal procedure is to reject the action that caused the violation. We can use `on delete cascade` or `on update cascade`. Other than cascade, we can use `set null` or `set default`.