# Lecture 9 

> `20-01-22`

## Functions and Procedures

Functions and procedures allow ‘business logic’ to be stored in the database and executed from SQL statements. 

We can define a function using the following syntax

```sql
create function <name> (params)
	returns <datatype>
	begin
		...
	end
```

You can return scalars or relations. We can also define external language routines in other programming languages. These procedures can be more efficient than the ones defined in SQL. We can declare external language procedures and functions using the following.

```sql
create procedure <name>(in params, out params (?))
language <programming-language>
external name <file_path>
```

However, there are security issues with such routines. To deal with security problems, we can 

- **sandbox techniques** - using a safe language like Java which cannot access/damage other parts of the database code.
- run external language functions/procedures in a separate process, with no access to the database process’ memory.

## Triggers

When certain actions happen, we would like the database to react and do something as a response. A **trigger** is a statement that is executed automatically by the system as a  side effect of a modification to the database. To design a trigger mechanism, we must specify the conditions under which the trigger is to be executed and the actions to be taken when the trigger executes. The syntax varies from database to database and the user must be wary of it.

The SQL:1999 syntax is

```sql
create trigger <name> after [update, insert, delete] of <relation> on <attributes>
referencing new row as nrow
referencing old row as orow
[for each row]
	...
```

 If we do not want the trigger to be executed for every row update, then we can use statement level triggers. This ensures that the actions is executed for all rows affected by a transaction. We use `for each` instead of `for each row` and we reference tables instead of rows. 

Triggers need not be used to update materialized views, logging, and many other typical use cases. Use of triggers is not encouraged as they have a risk of unintended execution.

## Recursion in SQL

SQL:1999 permits recursive view definition. Why do we need recursion? For example, if we want to find which courses are a prerequisite (direct/indirect) for a specific course, we can use

```sql
with recursive rec_prereq(course_id, prereq_id) as (
	select course_id, prereq_id from prereq
	union
	select rec_prereq.course_id, prereq.prereq_id,
	from rec_prereq, prereq
	where rec_prereq.prereq_id = prereq.course_id
) select * from rec_prereq;
```

This example view, `rec_prereq` is called the *transitive closure* of the `prereq` relation. Recursive views make it possible to write queries, such as transitive closure queries, that cannot be written without recursion or iteration. The alternative to recursion is to write a procedure to iterate as many times as required.

The final result of recursion is called the **fixed point** of the recursive view. Recursive views are required to be **monotonic**. This is usually achieved using `union` without `except` and `not in`.

## Advanced Aggregation Features

### Ranking

Ranking is done in conjunction with an order by specification. Can we implement ranking with the knowledge we have currently? Yes, we can use count() to check how many tuples are ahead of the current tuple.

```sql
select *,  (select count(*) from r as r2 where r2.t > r1.t) + 1 from r as r1
```

However, this is $$\mathcal O(n^2)$$. Also, note that the above query implements *sparse rank*. *Dense rank* can be implemented using the `unique` keyword. Rank in SQL can be implemented using `rank() over ([order by A desc])`.

Ranking can be done within partitions within the dataset. This is done using `partition by`. The whole query is given by

```sql
select ID, dept_name, rank() over
	(partition by dept_name order by GPA desc)
from dept_grades
order by dept_name, dept_rank
```

<u>Multiple rank clauses can occur in a single select clause!</u> Ranking is done after applying `group by` clause/aggregation. Finally, if we want only the top few ranks, we can use `limit`. However, this method is restrictive as we can’t select top-n in each partition and it is inherently non-deterministic. This is because ties are broken arbitrarily. It is usually better to select directly using the rank attribute by embedding the relation in an outer query.

Ranking has other function such as 

- `percent_rank` gives percentile
- `cume_dist` gives fraction
- `row_number` (non-deterministic)

SQL:1999 permits the user to specify `nulls first` or `nulls last`. 

For a given constant $$n$$, the function `ntile(n)` takes the tuples in each partition in the specified order, and divides them into $$n$$ buckets with equal number of tuples.

## Windowing

Here are the examples of window specifications

```sql
between rows unbounded preceding and current
rows nbounded preceding
range between 10 preceding and current row
range interval 10 day preceding
-- Given a relation transaction
-- where value is positive for a deposite and 
-- negative for a withdrawal, find total balance
-- of each account after each transaction on it
select account_number, date_time, 
	sum(value) over 
		(partition by account_number
        order by date_time
        rows unbounded preceding)
   	as balance
from transaction
order by account_number, date_time
```

We can perform windowing within partitions.