# Lecture 10 

> `24-01-22`

We will cover one last concept in SQL and then move on to ER models.

## OLAP

OLAP stands for Online Analytical Processing. It allows interactive analysis of data, allowing data to be summarized and viewed in different ways in an online fashion. Data that can be modeled as dimension attributes and measure attributes are called **multidimensional data**. **Measure attributes** measure some value that can be aggregated upon. **Dimension attributes** define the dimension on which measure attributes are viewed.

Items are often represented using **cross-tabulation** (cross-tab), also referred to as a **pivot table**. The dimension attributes form the row and column headers. The measure attributes are mentioned in each individual cell. Similarly, we can create a **data cube** which is a multidimensional generalization of a cross-tab. We can represent cross-tabs using relations. These can be used in SQL with `null` representing the total aggregates (despite the confusion).

The `cube` operation in SQL computes the union of `group by`'s on every subset of the specified attributes. The function `grouping()` can be applied on an attribute to check if the `null` value represents ‘all’ or not. It returns 1 if the value is a null value representing all. The `rollup` construct generates union on every prefix of a specified list of attributes. It can be used to generate aggregates at multiple levels of a hierarchy.

### OLAP Operations

- **Pivoting** - Changing the dimensions used in a cross-tab
- **Slicing** - Creating a cross-tab for fixed values only. Sometimes called **dicing** when values for multiple dimensions are fixed.
- **Rollup** - Moving from finer-granularity data to a coarser granularity.
- **Drill down** - Opposite of rollup.

Early OLAP systems precomputed all possible aggregates in order to provide online response.  Since this is infeasible, it suffices to precompute some aggregates and compute others on demand from pre-computed aggregates.

# ~Chapter 6: Database Design using the ER Model

How do we design schemas for a database? Is there any systematic way? We shall study this in the following chapter. The entity-relationship model proves useful in modelling the data.

When we design a database, we initially characterize the data needs of the database users. Then, we choose a data model to translate the requirements into a conceptual schema. The conceptual schema is designed using the ER model, and the implementation can be done in different ways such as the relation model. We do this in the final step where we move from an abstract data model to the implementation in the database.

Why do we care about good design? A bad design can have *redundancy* - repeats information which might cause data inconsistency and *incompleteness* which might make certain aspects of the enterprise difficult or impossible to model.

## ER Model

**Entity** is a thing or an object in the enterprise that is distinguishable from other objects. It is described by a set of attributes. A **relationship** is an association among several entities. These models are represented graphically using the ER diagram.

### Entity sets

An **entity set** is a set of entities of the same type that share the same properties. For example, it can be a set of all persons (each of which is an entity). A subset of the attributes form a primary key of the entity set. 

Entity sets can be represented graphically using rectangles and attributes listed inside it. The primary keys are underlined.

### Relationship sets

A **relationship set** is a mathematical relation among $$n \geq 2$$ entities, each taken from entity sets.


$$
\{(e_1, e_2, \dots, e_n \vert e_1 \in E_1, e_2 \in E_2, \dots, e_n \in E_n\}
$$


where $$(e_1, e_2, \dots, e_n)$$ is a relationship. We draw a line between the related entities to represent relationships. Relationship sets are represented using diamonds.

An attribute can also be associated with a relationship set. This is shown using a rectangle with the attribute name inside connected to the relationship set diamond with a dotted line.

### Roles

The entity sets of a relationship need not be distinct. In such a case, we assign ‘roles’ to the entity sets. 

### Degree of a relationship set

The degree of a relationship set is defined as the number of entities associated with the relationship set. Most relationship sets are binary. We can’t represent all ternary relations as a set of binary relations. 

There are no null values in the ER model. This becomes an issue in case of ternary relationships. Such problems are prevented in binary relationships. For example, think about the ER model of people and their parents. If someone has only one parent, then it is difficult to represent this using a ternary relationship between people, fathers and mothers. Instead, we could have two separate father and mother relationships. Binary relationships also provide the flexibility of mapping multiple entities to the same entity between two entity sets. While this is also possible in ternary relationships, we have more options in case of binary relationships. 

Does ternary relationship convey more information than binary relationship in any case? Yes, that is why we can’t represent all ternary relations as a set of binary relations. For instance, think about the instructor, project and student mapping. There are many combinations possible here which can’t be covered using binary relationships.

### Complex attributes

So far, we have considered atomic attributes in the relation model. The ER model does not impose any such requirement. We have **simple** and **composite** attributes. A composite attribute can be broken down into more attributes. For instance, we can have first and last name in name. We can have *single-valued* and *multi-valued* attributes. We can also have *derived* attributes. Multivalued attributes are represented inside curly braces `{}`.

### Mapping cardinality constraints

A mapping cardinality can be one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one or many-to-many.

