# Lecture 13

> `31-01-22`

The term **lossy decomposition** does not imply loss of tuples but rather the loss of information (relation) among the tuples. How do we formalise this idea?

## Lossless Decomposition - 1

Let $$R$$ be a relations schema and let $$R_1$$ and $$R_2$$ form a decomposition of $$R = R_1 \cup R_2$$. A decomposition if lossless if there is no loss of information by replacing $$R$$ with the two relation schemas $$R_1, R_2$$. That is,


$$
\pi_{R_1}(r) \bowtie \pi_{R_2}(r) = r
$$


Note that this relations must hold for all **instances** to call the decomposition lossless. And, conversely a decomposition is lossy if


$$
r \subset \pi_{R_1}(r) \bowtie \pi_{R_2}(r)
$$


We shall see the sufficient condition in a [later section](#lossless-decomposition---2).

## Normalization theory

We build the theory of functional/multivalued dependencies to decide whther a particular relation is in a “good” form. 

## Functional Dependencies

An instance of a relations that satisfies all such real-world constriants is called a **legal instance** of the relation. <u>A functional dependency is a generalization of the notion of a key</u>. 

Let $$R$$ be a relation schema and $$\alpha, \beta \subseteq R$$. The functional dependency $$ \alpha \to \beta$$ holds on $$R$$ iff for any legal relations $$r(R)$$ whenever two tuples $$t_1, t_2$$ of $$r$$ agree on the attributes $$\alpha$$, they also agree on the attributes $$\beta$$. That is,


$$
\alpha \to \beta \triangleq t_1[\alpha] = t_2[\alpha] \implies t_1[\beta] = t_1[\beta]
$$


### Closure properties

If $$A \to B$$ and $$B \to C$$ Then $$A \to C$$. The set of **all** functional dependencies logically implied by a functional dependency set $$F$$ is the **closure** of $$F$$ denoted by $$F^+$$. 

### Keys and Functional Dependencies

$$K$$ is a superket for relation schema $$R$$ iff $$K \to R$$. $$K$$ is a candidate key for $$R$$ iff

- $$K \to R$$ and
- for no $$A \subset K$$, $$A \to R$$

Functional dependencies allow us to express constraints that cannot be expressed using super keys. 

### Use of functional dependencies

We use functional dependencies to test relations to see if they are legal and to specify constraints on the set of legal relations. 

**Note.** A specific instance of a relation schema may satisfy a functional dependency even if that particular functional dependency does not hold across all legal instances.

## Lossless Decomposition - 2

A decomposition of $$R$$ into $$R_1$$ and $$R_2$$ is lossless decomposition if at least one of the following dependecnies is in $$F^+$$

- $$R_1 \cap R_2 \to R_1$$
- $$R_1 \cap R_2 \to R_2 $$

The above functional dependencies are a necessary condition only if all constraints are functional dependencies.

## Dependency Preservation

Testing functional dependency constrinats each time the database is updated can be costly. If testing a functional dependency can be done by considering just one relation, then the cost of testing this constraint is low. A decomposition that makes it computaitonally hard to enforce functional dependencies is sat to be **not dependency preserving**. 