# Lecture 14

> `01-02-22`

## Boyce-Codd Normal Form

There are a few designs of relational schema which prevent redundancies and have preferable properties. One such design format is BCNF.

A relation schema $$R$$ is in BCNF with respect to a set $$R$$ of functional dependencies if **for all** functional dependencies in $$F^+$$ of the form $$\alpha \to \beta$$ where $$\alpha, \beta \subseteq R$$, at least one of the following holds

- $$\alpha \to \beta$$ is trivial ($$\beta \subseteq \alpha$$)
- $$\alpha$$ is a superkey for $$R$$.

Let $$R$$ Be a schema $$R$$ That is not in BCNF. Let $$\alpha \to \beta$$ Be the FD that causes a violation of BCNF. Then, to convert $$R$$ to BCNF we decompose it to 

- $$\alpha \cup \beta$$ 
- $$R - (\beta - \alpha)$$

***Example.*** Consider the relation $$R= (A, B, C)$$ with $$F \{A \to B, B \to C\}$$. Suppose we have the following decompositions

- $$R_1 = (A, B), R_2 = (B, C)$$

  This decompositions is lossless-join and also dependency preserving. Notice that it is dependency preserving even though we have the $$A \to C$$ constraint. This is because $$A \to C$$ is implied from the other two constraints.

- $$R = (A, B), R_2 = (A, C)$$

  This decomposition is lossless but is not dependency preserving.

### BCNF and Dependency Preservation

<u>It is not always possible to achieve both BCNF and dependency preservation</u>.

## Third Normal Form

This form is useful when you are willing to allow a small amount of data redundancy in exchange for dependency preservation.

A relations $$R$$ Is in third normal form (3NF) if **for all** $$\alpha \to \beta \in F^+$$ **at least** one of the following holds

-  $$\alpha \to \beta$$ is trivial
- $$\alpha$$ is a super key for $$R$$
- Each attribute $$A$$ In  $$ \beta - \alpha$$ is contained in a candidate key for $$R$$. 

There are 1NF and 2NF forms but they are not very important. <u>If a relation is in BCNF, then it is in 3NF.</u>

### Redundancy in 3NF

Consider $$R$$ which is in 3NF $$R = (J, K, L)$$ and $$F = \{JK \to L, L \to K \}$$. Then, we can have the following instance

| J    | K    | L    |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| p1   | q1   | k1   |
| p2   | q1   | k1   |
| p3   | q1   | k1   |
| null | q2   | k2   |

### 3NF and Dependency Preservation

It is always possible to obtain a 3NF design without sacrificing losslessness or dependency preservation. However, we may have to use null values (like above) to represent some of the possible meaningful relationships among data items.

### Goals of Normalisation

A “good” schema consists of lossless decompositions and preserved dependencies. We can use 3NF and BCNF (preferable) for such purpose.

There are database schemas in BCNF that do not seem to be sufficiently normalised. *Multivalued dependencies, Insertion anomaly, ...*

## Functional Dependency Theory

### Closure of a set of functional dependencies

We can compute $$F^+$$ from $$F$$ by repeatedly applying **Armstrong’s Axioms** 

- **Reflexive rule** - If $$\beta \subseteq \alpha$$, then $$\alpha \to \beta$$
- **Augmentation rule** - If $$\alpha \to \beta$$, then $$\gamma\alpha \to \gamma\beta$$
- **Transitivity rule** - If $$\alpha \to \beta$$ and $$\beta \to \gamma$$ then $$\alpha \to \gamma$$

It is trivial to see that these rules are **sound**. However, showing that these rules are **complete** is much more difficult.

Additional rules include (can be derived from above)- 

- **Union rule** - If $$\alpha \to \beta$$ and $$\alpha \to \gamma$$, then $$\alpha \to \beta\gamma$$
- **Decomposition rule** - If $$\alpha \to \beta\gamma$$, then $$\alpha \to \beta$$
- **Pseudo-transitivity rule** - If $$\alpha \to \beta$$ and $$\gamma\beta \to \delta$$, then $$\alpha \gamma \to \delta$$

### Closure of Attribute Sets

Given a set of attributes $$\alpha$$, define the **closure** of $$\alpha$$ **under** $$F$$ (denoted by $$\alpha^+$$) as the set of attributes that are functionally determined by $$\alpha$$ under $$F$$. We use the following procedure to compute the closure of A

```
result := A
while (change) do
	for each beta to gamma in F do
		begin
			if beta in result then result = result union gamma
    end
```

The time complexity of this algorithm is $$\mathcal O(n^3)$$ where $$n$$ is the number of attributes.

There are several uses of the attribute closure algorithm

- To test if $$\alpha$$ is a superkey, we compute $$\alpha$$ and check if it contains all attributes of the relation
- To check if a functional dependency $$\alpha \to \beta$$ holds, see if $$\beta \subseteq \alpha^+$$
- For computing the closure of $$F$$. For each $$\gamma \subseteq R$$, we find $$\gamma$$ and for each $$S \subset \gamma^+$$, we output a functional dependency $$\gamma \to S$$.

### Canonical Cover

A **Canonical cover** of a functional dependency set $$F$$ is the minimal set of functional dependencies such that its closure is $$F^+$$.

An attribute of a functional dependency in $$F$$ is **extraneous** if we can remove it without changing $$F^+$$. Removing an attribute from the left side of a functional dependency will make it a stronger constraint.

