# Lecture 16

> `07-02-22`

## Further Normal Forms

**Join dependencies** generalise multivalued dependencies and lead to **project-join normal form (PJNF)** also known as **5NF**. A class of even more general constraints leads to a normal form called **domain-key normal form**. There are hard to reason with and no set of sound and complete set of inference rules exist.

## Overall Database Design Process

We have assumed $$R$$ is given. In real life, we can get it based on applications through ER diagrams. However, one can consider $$R$$ to be generated from a single relations containing all attributes that are of interest (called **universal relation**). Normalisation breaks this $$R$$ into smaller relations.

Some aspects of database design are not caught by normalisation. For example, a **crosstab**, where values for on attribute become column names, is not captured by normalisation forms.

## Modeling Temporal Data

**Temporal data** have an associated time interval during which the data is valid. A **snapshot** is the value of the data at a particular point in time. Adding a temporal component results in functional dependencies being invalidated because the attribute values vary over time. A **temporal functional dependency** $$X \xrightarrow{\tau} Y$$ holds on schema $$R$$ if the functional dependency $$X \to Y$$ holds on all snapshots for all legal instances $$r(R)$$.

In practice, database designers may add start and end time attributes to relations. SQL standard [start, end). In modern SQL, we can write

```sql
period for validtime (start, end)
primary key (course_id, validtime without overlaps)
```

# ~Chapter 8: Complex Data Types

Expected to read from the textbook.

- Semi-Structured Data
- Object Orientation
- Textual Data
- Spatial Data

## Semi-Structured Data

Many applications require storage of complex data, whose schema changes often. The relational model’s requirement of atomic data types may be an overkill. JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) and XML (Extensible Markup Language) are widely used semi-structured data models.

**Flexible schema** 

- **Wide column** representation allow each tuple to have a different set of attributes and can add new attributes at any time
- **Sparse column** representation has a fixed but large set of attributes but each tuple may store only a subset.

**Multivalued data types**

- Sets, multi-sets
- Key-value map
- Arrays
- Array database

### JSON

It is a verbose data type widely used in data exchange today, There are efficient data storage variants like BSON

### Knowledge Representation

Representation of human knowledge is a long-standing goal of AI. **RDF: Resource Description Format** is a simplified representation for facts as triples of the form (subject, predicate, object). For example, (India, Population, 1.7B) is one such form. This form has a natural graph representation. There is a query language called SparQL for this representation. **Linked open data** project aims to connect different knowledge graphs to allow queries to span databases.

To represent n-ary relationships, we can 

- Create an artificial entity and link to each of the n entities
- Use **quads** instead of triples with context entity

## Object Orientation

**Object-relational data model** provides richer type system with complex data types and object orientation. Applications are often written in OOP languages. However, the type system does not match relational type system and switching between imperative language and SQL is cumbersome. 

To use object-orientation with databases, we could build an **object-relational database**, adding object-oriented features to a relational database. Otherwise, we could automatically convert data between OOP and relational model specified by **object-relational mapping**. **Object-oriented database** is another option that natively supports object-oriented data and direct access from OOP. The second method is widely used now.

### Object-Relational Mapping

ORM systems allow 

- specification of mapping between OOP objects and database tuples
- Automatic modification of database
- Interface to retrieve objects satisfying specified conditions

ORM systems can be used for websites but not for data-analytics applications!

## Textual Data

**Information retrieval** basically refers to querying of unstructured data. Simple model of keyword queries consists of fetching all documents containing all the input keywords. More advanced models rank the relevance of documents. 

### Ranking using TF-IDF

Term is a keyword occurring in a document query. The **term frequency** $$TF(d, t)$$ is the relevance of a term $$t$$ to a document $$d$$. It is defined by 


$$
TF(d, t) = \log( 1+ n(d, t)/n(d))
$$


where $$n(d, t)$$ is the number of occurrences of term $$t$$ in document $$d$$ and $$n(d)$$ is the number of terms in the document $$d$$.

The **inverse document frequency** $$IDF(t)$$ is given by 


$$
IDF(t) = 1/n(t)
$$


This is used to give importance to terms that are rare. **Relevance** of a document $$d$$ to a set of terms $$Q$$ can be defined as


$$
r(d, Q) = \sum_{t \in Q} TF(d, t)*IDF(t)
$$


There are other definitions that take **proximity** of words into account and **stop words** are often ignored.