# Lecture 17

> `08-02-22`

The TF-IDF method in search engine was did not work out as web designers added repeated occurrences of words on their website to increase the relevance. There were plenty of shady things web designers could do in order to increase the page relevance. To prevent this problem, Google introduced the model of **PageRank**.

### Ranking using Hyperlinks

Hyperlinks provide very important clues to importance. Google’s PageRank measures the popularity/importance based on hyperlinks to pages. 

- Pages hyperlinked from many pages should have higher PageRank
- Pages hyperlinked from pages with higher PageRank should have higher PageRank

This model is formalised by a **random walk** model. Let $$T[i, j]$$ be the probability that a random walker who is on page $$i$$ will click on the link to page $$j$$. Then, PageRank[j] for each page $$j$$ is defined as 


$$
P[j] = \delta/N + (1 - \delta)*\sum_{i = 1}^n(T(i, j)*P(j))
$$


where $$N$$ is the total number of pages and $$\delta$$ is a constant usually set to $$0.15$$. As the number of pages are really high, some sort of bootstrapping method (Monte Carlo simulation) is used to approximate the PageRank. PageRank also can be fooled using mutual link spams. 

### Retrieval Effectiveness

Measures of effectiveness

- **Precision** - what % of returned results are actually relevant.
- **Recall** - what percentage of relevant results were returned

## Spatial Data

Not covered

# ~Chapter 9: Application Development

## HTTP and Sessions

The HTTP protocol is **connectionless**. That is, once the server replied to a request, the server closes the connection with the client, and forgets all about the request. The motivation to this convention is that it reduces the load on the server. The problem however is authentication for every connection. Information services need session information to acquire user authentication only once per session. This problem is solved by **cookies**.

A **cookie** is a small piece of text containing identifying information

- sent by server to browser on first interaction to identify session
- sent by browser to the server that created the cookie on further interactions (part of the HTTP protocol)
- Server saved information about cookies it issued, and can use it when serving a request. E.g, authentication information, and user preferences

Cookies can be stored permanently or for a limited time.

**Java Servlet** defines an API for communication between the server and app to spawn threads that can work concurrently.

## Web Services

Web services are basically URLs on which we make a request to obtain results. 

Till HTML4, local storage was restricted to cookies. However, this was expanded to any data type in HTML5.

## HTTP and HTTPS

The application server authenticates the user by the means of user credentials. What if a hacker scans all the packets going to the server to obtain a user’s credentials? So, HTTPS was developed to encrypt the data sent between the browser and the server. How is this encryption done? The server and the browser need to have a common key. Turns out, there are crypto techniques that can achieve the same.

What if someone creates a middleware that simulates a website a user uses? This is known as **man in the middle attack**. How do we know we are connected to the authentic website? The basic idea is to have a **public key** of the website and send data encrypted via this public key. Then, the website uses its own **private key** to decrypt the data. This conversion is reversible. As in, the website encrypts the data using its own private key which can be decoded by the user using the public key.

How do we get public keys for millions of websites out there? We use **digital certificates**. Let’s say we have a website’s public key and that website has the public key of the user (via their website). The website then encrypts the user’s public key using its private key to generate a digital certificate. This digital certificate can be advertised on the user’s website to allow other users to check the authenticity of the user’s website. Now, another user can obtain this certificate, decrypt it using the first website’s private key, and verify the authenticity of the user’s webpage. These verifications are maintained as a hierarchical structure to maintain digital certificates of millions of websites.

## Cross Site Scripting

In cross site scripting, the user’s session for one website is used in another website to execute actions at the server of the first website. For example, suppose a bank’s website, when logged in, allows the user to transfer money by visiting the link `xyz.com/?amt=1&to=123`. If another website has a similar link (probably for displaying an image), then it can succeed in transferring the amount if the user is still logged into the bank. This vulnerability is called called **cross-site scripting (XSS)** or **cross-site request forgery (XSRF/CSRF)**. **XSRF** tokens are a form of cookies that are used to check these cross-site attacks (CORS from Django).