# Lecture 18

> `14-02-22`

## Application Level Authorisation

Current SQL standard does not allow fine-grained authorisation such as students seeing their own grades but not others. **Fine grained (row-level) authorisation** schemes such as Oracle Virtual Private Database (VPD) allows predicates to be added transparently to all SQL queries.

# ~Chapter 10: Big Data

Data grew in terms of volume (large amounts of data), velocity (higher rates of insertions) and variety (many types of data) in the recent times. This new generation of data is known as **Big Data**.

Transaction processing systems (ACID properties) and query processing systems needed to be made scalable. 

## Distributed File Systems

A distributed file system stores data across a large collection of machines, but provides a single file-system view. Files are replicated to handle hardware failure, and failures were to be detected and recovered from. 

### Hadoop File System Architecture

A single namespace is used for an entire cluster. Files are broken up into blocks (64 MB) and replicated on multiple *DataNodes*. A client finds the location of blocks from *NameNode* and accesses the data from *DataNodes*.

The key idea of this architecture is using large block sizes for the actual file data. This way, the metadata would be reduced and the *NameNode* can store the *DataNodes* info in a much more scalable manner.

Distributed file systems are good for <u>millions of large files</u>. However, distributed file systems have very high overheads and poor performance with billions of smaller tuples. Data coherency also needs to be ensured (write-once-read-many access model). 

## Sharding

It refers to partitioning data across multiple databases. Partitioning is usually done on some **partitioning attributes** known as **partitioning keys** or **shard keys**. The advantage to this is that it scales well and is easy to implement. However, it is not transparent (manually writing all routes and queries across multiple databases), removing load from an overloaded database is not easy, and there is a higher change of failure. Sharding is used extensively by banks today.

## Key Value Storage Systems

These systems store large numbers of small sized records. Records are partitioned across multiple machines, and queries are routed by the system to appropriate machine. Also, the records are replicated across multiple machines to ensure availability. Key-value stores ensure that updates are applied to all replicas to ensure consistency.

Key-value stores may have

- <u>uninterpreted bytes</u> with an associated key
- <u>Wide-column</u> with associated key
- JSON

**Document stores** store semi-structured data, typically JSON. Key-value stores support `put`, `get` and `delete`. Some systems also support **range queries** on key values. Document stores also support queries on non-key attributes. <u>Key value stores are not full database systems</u>. They have no/limited support for transactional updates and applications must manage query processing on their own. These systems are therefore known as **NoSQL** systems.

## Parallel and Distributed Databases

**Replication** to ensure availability. **Consistency** implemented using majority protocols. **Network partitions** involve a network can break into two or more parts, each with active systems that can’t talk to other parts. In presence of partitions, cannot guarantee both availability and consistency - **Brewer’s CAP** theorem. Traditional database systems choose consistency, and most web applications choose availability. 