# Lecture 20

> `17-02-22`

## Algebraic Operations in Spark

**Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD)** abstraction is a collection of records that can be stored across multiple machines. RDDs can be created by applying algebraic operations on other RDDs. This is a generalisation to RA where the operators can be any piece of code. <u>RDDs can be lazily computed when needed.</u> As in, the tree is executed only on specific functions such as `saveAsTextFile()` or `collect()`.

Spark makes use of Java Lambda expressions with the following syntax.

```java
s -> ArrayasList(s.split(" ")).iterate()
```

RDDs in Spark can be typed in programs, but not dynamically.

## Streaming Data

Streaming data refers to data that arrives in a continuous fashion in contrast to **data-at-rest**. 

Approaches to querying streams- 

- **Windowing** - Break up stream into windows and queries are run on windows. 
- **Continuous Queries** - Queries written e.g. in SQL, output partial result based on stream seen so far; query results are updated continuously.
- **Algebraic operators on streams** - Operators are written in an imperative language.
- **Pattern Matching** - *Complex Even Processing (CEP)* systems. Queries specify patterns, system detects occurrences of patterns and triggers actions.
- **Lambda architecture** - Split the stream into two, one output goes to stream processing system and the other to a database for storage.

There are stream extensions to SQL - Tumbling window, Hopping window, Sliding window and Sessions windows.

### Publish Subscribe Systems

**Public-subscribe (pub-sub)** systems provide convenient abstraction for processing streams. For example, Apache Kafka

## Graph Databases

A **graph data model** can be seen as a generalisation of the ER model. Every entity can be seen as a node, and every binary relationship is an edge. Higher degree relationships can be expressed as multiple binary relationships.

Check out *Neo4J*. Query languages for graph databases make it easy for graph traversal.

