# Lecture 23

> `07-03-22`

**Software RAID** vs. **Hardware RAID**. Copies are written sequentially to guard against corruption in case of power failure. There are couple of hardware issues

- **Latent sector failures** - Data successfully written earlier gets damaged which can result in data loss even if only one disk fails.
- **Data scrubbing** - Continuous scans for latent failures, and recover from copy/parity.
- **Hot swapping** - Replacement of disk while the system is running without powering it down. This reduces the time to recovery, and some hardware RAID systems support this.

# ~Chapter 13: Data Storage Structures

## File Organization

The database is stored as a collection of *files*. Each file is a sequence of *records*, and each record is a sequence of fields. We will assume the following

- Fixed record size
- Each file has records of one particular type only
- Different files are used for different relations
- Records are smaller than a disk block

### Fixed length records

We store the records contiguously, and access a record based on the index and the offset. There might be fragmentation at the end of the block. How do we handle deleted records? We shall link all the free records on a free list.

### Variable length records

Strings are typically variable sized. Each record has variable length attributes represented by fixed size (offset, length) with the actual data stored after all fixed length attributes. Null values are represented by null-value bitmap. How do we structure these records in a block? 

### Slotted Page Structure

A slotted page header contains - 

- number of record entries
- end of free space in the block
- location and size of each record

The records are stored contiguously after the header. Disk pointers point to the header and not directly to the record. 

### Storing Large Objects

Records were assumed to be smaller than pages. Otherwise, we store the records as files. In Postgres, the large attribute is automatically broken up into smaller parts.

## Organisation of Records in Files

Records can be stored as

- **Heap** - Record can be placed anywhere in the file where there is space. We maintain a hierarchical free space map of two levels usually.
- **Sequential** - Store records in sorted sequential order, based on the value of the search key of each record. 
- **B+ tree file organization**
- **Hashing**

Some databases also support **multi-table clustering file organisation** that allows records of different relations to be stored in the same file.

## Metadata and Partitioning

The **data dictionary** or **system catalog** stored **metadata** such as 

- names of relations
- names, types and lengths of attributes of each relation
- names and definitions of views
- integrity constraints
