# Lecture 24

> `08-03-22`

### Partitioning

**Table partitioning** - Records in a relation can be partitioned into smalled relations that are stored separately - **Horizontal partitioning**. Store each attribute of a relation separately - **vertical partitioning**. Also known as **columnar representation** or **column oriented storage**. This is a good idea for data analytics but not for transaction processing. The benefits of this representation include

- Reduced IO if only some attributes are accessed
- Improved CPU cache performance
- Improved Compression
- Vector Processing on modern CPU architectures

The disadvantages are

- Tuple reconstruction is difficult
- Tuple deletion and updates are difficult
- Cost of decompression

Some databases support a hybrid model which has both row and column representation. 

**Note.** ORC and Parquet  use file formats with columnar storage inside file. These are log file formats.

## Storage Access

Blocks are units of both storage allocation and data transfer. At the disk layer, a page is the physical unit. **Buffer** - The portion of the main memory to store copies of the disk blocks. 

### Buffer Manager

**Pinned block** - A memory block that is not allowed to be written back to the disk. A **pin** is done before reading/writing data from a block. An **unpin** done when read/write is complete. Multiple concurrent pin/unpin operations are possible. There are also **shared and exclusive locks** on buffer. 

### Buffer Replacement Policies

Most OS replace the block using the LRU strategy. However, this is not suitable in many database operations. Therefore, a database system can query plan to predict future references. There are **toss-immediate** and **MRU** strategies too.

# ~Chapter 14: Indexing

A **search key** is a set of a

