# Lecture 26

> `14-03-22`

If we allow non-unique keys, we can store a key with multiple pointers. However, the complexity comes in terms of deletion. Worst case complexity may be linear.

### $$B^+$$-Tree file Organisation

Leaf nodes in a $$B^+$$ tree file organisation store records, instead of pointers. As records are larger than pointers, the maximum number of records that can be stored in a lead node is less than the number of pointers in a non-leaf node. To improve space utilisation, we can involve more sibling nodes in redistribution during splits and merges. Involving 2 siblings in redistribution results in each node having at least $$\lfloor 2n/3 \rfloor$$ entries.

Record relocation and secondary indices - If a record moves, all secondary indices that store record pointers have to be updated. Therefore, node splits in $$B^+$$ tree file organisation become very expensive. The solution to this is use a search key of the $$B^+$$ tree file organisation instead o record pointer in a secondary index. For example, consider students database sorted using roll numbers with names as a secondary index. If the records move, we would need to update all the “name” index pointers. So what we do is, make the “name” index pointers point to the “roll number” index pointers instead of the records directly. Since “roll number” is a clustered index, no relocation of secondary indices is required.

### Indexing Strings

How do we use variable length strings as keys? We use **prefix compression** along with variable fanout (?). In the internal nodes, we can use simplified separators. 

## Bulk Loading and Bottom-Up Build

Inserting entries one-at-a-time into a $$B^+$$-tree requires $$\geq$$ 1 I/O per entry assuming leaves don’t fit in the memory. 

- Sort entries first, and insert in a sorted order. This will have much improved I/O performance. 
- Build a $$B^+$$tree **bottom-up**. AS before sort the entries, and then create tree layer-by-layer starting with the leaf level. 

However, the above two methods expect a bulk insertion. What do we do if we have a sudden burst of inserts? We will look at alternatives later.

### B-Tree Index Files

Similar to $$B^+$$-tree but B-tree allows search-key values to appear only once and eliminates redundant storage of search keys. The pointers to the records are stored in the internal nodes too! The problem with this approach is that the tree becomes taller. There is minimal advantage too.

Indexing on flash has a few issues, as writes are no in-place and it eventually requires a more expensive erase.  

A key idea is to use large node size to optimise disk access, but structure data within a node using a tree with small node size, instead of using an array for faster cache access (so that all nodes fit inside a single cache line).

## Hashing

### Handling bucket overflows

**Overflow chaining** - The overflow buckets of a given bucket are chained together in a linked list. The above scheme is called **closed addressing** or **open/closed hashing**. 

Overflow can happen due to insufficient buckets or skewness in the data. 

Hashing is not used widely on disks but is used in-memory. 

**Covering indices** - Attributes that are added to index to prevent the control from fetching the entire record. 

Some databases allow creation of indices on foreign keys.

Indices over tuples can be problematic for a few queries due to lexicographic ordering. 