# Lecture 27

> `15-03-22`

## Write Optimised Indices

Performance of $$B^+$$ trees can be poor for write intensive workloads. This is because we require one I/O per leaf, assuming all internal nodes are in memory. There are two approaches to reducing cost of writes

- Log-structured merge tree
- Buffer tree

### Log Structured Merge (LSM) Tree

Consider only insert queries for now. Records are first inserted into in-memory L0 tree. When the in-memory tree is full, we move the records to the disk in the L1 tree. $$B^+$$-tree is constructed using bottom-up by merging the existing L1 tree with records from L0 tree. The goal is to minimise random I/O.

The benefits are that inserts are done using sequential I/O operations and the leaves are full avoiding space wastage. The drawbacks are that queries have to search multiple trees and the entire context of each level is copied multiple times. **Bloom filters** avoid lookups in most trees. The idea is to use hash functions and bitmaps. 

How about deletes? They will now incur a lot of I/O. We do a logical delete by inserting a new delete entry. Updates are handled as inserts followed by deletes. 

LSM trees were introduced for disk-based indices. These are useful to minimise erases with flash-based indices. 

### Buffer Tree

Each internal node of $$B^+$$-tree has a buffer to store inserts. The inserts are moved to lower levels when the buffer is full. With a large buffer, many records are moved to lower level at each time. Therefore, per record I/O decreases. 

The benefits are less overhead on queries, and it can be used with any tree index structure. However, they have more random I/O than LSM trees.

## Spatial and Temporal Indices

A **k-d tree** is a structure used for indexing multiple dimensions. Each level of k-d tree partitions the space into two, and we cycle through the dimensions at each level. Range queries do not have $$\log$$ complexity bounds in this index structure.

Queries can mix spatial (contains, overlaps) and non-spatial conditions. 

The **k-d-B** tree extends the k-d tree to allow multiple child nodes for each internal node. This is well suited for secondary storage.

Each node in a **quadtree** is associated with a rectangular region of space. Similarly, we can cut across more dimensions in each level.

### R-tree

The motivation behind this structure was to store objects in the spatial domain in a single leaf. We try to create minimally overlapping bounding boxes for all the objects and create a structure similar to a $$B^+$$-tree. Multiple paths may need to be searched, but the performance is good in practice. 

Suppose we want to insert a new object that overlaps with many bounding boxes. We choose the box which overlaps the least, or the box which has the lowest change in size on the addition. Now, insertion is done via the **clustering algorithm**. The clustering is also done via some heuristics such as minimum overlap of bounding boxes. Greedy heuristics are often used.