# Lecture 32

> `28-03-22`

Note that left/right outer join is not commutative! An optimiser has to consider the cost not just the size. Sometimes, more tuples might be faster due to indices. Associativity is some times helpful in join when the join result of, say, $$r2, r3$$ is much larger than that of $$r1, r2$$. In that case, we compute the smaller join first. One must also beware about the overhead of applying all these transformations.

There are other optimisations such as detecting duplicate sub-expressions and replacing them by one copy. Dynamic Programming is also put to use. The algorithms for transformation of evaluation plans must also be taken into account. Practical query optimisers either enumerate all plans and choose the best plan using cost, or they use heuristics to choose a plan. 

### Cost based optimisation

If we have $$r_1 \bowtie \dots \bowtie r_n$$, we have $$(2(n - 1))!/(n - 1)!$$. We use dynamic programming to store the least-cost join order. Using dynamic programming, we are bringing down factorial order to an exponential order $$3^n$$. The cost of each join is evaluated by interchanging selection and join operations based on indices. Further optimisation is done by only considering **left-deep join trees** where the rhs of a join is a relation and not an intermediate join. After this, the time complexity is $$\mathcal O(n2^n)$$ and space complexity is $$\mathcal O(2^n)$$.

How about sort orders? Certain sort orders can make subsequent operations cheaper. However, we don’t consider this much. The Volcano project also considers physical equivalence rules.

### Heuristic Optimisation

Heuristic optimisation transforms the query-tree by using a set of rules that typically improve execution performance. Nested subqueries hinder optimisation techniques.

System-R used heuristics for aggregates. We also need to check <u>optimisation cost budget</u> and <u>plan caching</u>. As some applications use the same query repeatedly, we can try and use the same evaluation plan based on a heuristic on statistics.

## Statistics for Cost Estimation

We consider $$n_r$$ (no. of tuples), $$b_r$$ (no. of blocks), $$I_r$$ (size of a tuple), $$f_r$$ (blocking factor $$b_r = \lceil n_r/f_r\rceil$$) and $$V(A, r)$$ (no. of distinct values). Histograms are used to compute statistics. 





