# Lecture 33

> `29-03-22`

### Selection size estimation

- $$\sigma_{A = v}(r) \approx n_r/V(A, r)$$

- Assuming, $$\min$$ and $$\max$$ are available -
  $$
  \sigma_{A \leq v}(r) = \begin{cases}
  0 && v < \min(A, r) \\
  n_r \cdot \frac{v - \min(A, r)}{\max(A, r) - \min{A, r}} 
  \end{cases}
  $$

These estimates are refined using updates in the histograms. Similarly, we can derive size estimates for complex selections.

### Join size estimation

- If $$R \cap S = \phi$$, then $$r \bowtie s = r \times s$$.
- If $$R \cap S$$ is a key in $$R$$, then a tuple  of $$s$$ will join with at most one tuples from $$r$$ -> $$ r \bowtie s \leq s$$.
- If $$R \cap S$$ in $$S$$ is a foreign key in $$S$$ referencing $$R$$, then $$r \bowtie s = s$$.
- If the common attribute is not a key, then the size is $$(n_r*n_s)/V(A, s)$$ if every tuple in $$R$$ produces a tuple in the join.

Similarly, we have other size estimations.

For projection, we have $$\Pi_A(r) = V(A, r)$$, and for aggregation we have $${_G}\gamma_A(r) = V(G, r)$$. There are estimates for set operations too!

In summary, these estimates work well in practice, but the errors are multiplied across multiple queries. In worst cases, they might hamper the performance.

## Additional Optimisations

### Optimising Nested Subqueries

SQL treats the nested subquery as a function with a few parameters - This evaluation is known as **correlated evaluation**. The parameters to the function are known as **correlation variables**. This method is inefficient because a large number of call may be made for the nested query that results in unnecessary random I/O.

However, every nested subquery in SQL can be written in terms of joins. SQL optimisers try to do this. One must be beware of duplicates during this conversion. The (left)**semijoin** operator ⋉ is defined as - A tuple $$r_i$$ appears $$n$$ times in $$ r ⋉_\theta s$$ if it appears $$n$$ times in $$r$$, and there is atleast on matching tuple $$s_i$$ in $$s$$. This operator is often used by optimisers to maintain the duplicate count. Similarly, for `not exists`, we have **anti semijoin** $$\bar ⋉$$.

**Decorrelation** is the process of replacing a nested query by a query with a join/semi-join. This process is a bit non-trivial in case of scalar subqueries. Note that relational algebra can’t deal with exceptions.

### Materialised views

The values of the view are computed and stored. The re-computation during updates is expensive. Therefore, we adopt <u>incremental view maintenance</u>. The changes to a relation or expressions are referred to as its **differential**. 

To explain the above, consider a materialised view of a join. For a new insert, we find the corresponding matching tuples for join and add them. Similarly for deletes. We can do this due to distributivity of $$\bowtie$$ and $$\cup$$.

Project is a more difficult operation due to duplicates. Therefore, we maintain a count for how many times the set of attributes occur. Aggregates can also be done in a similar way.

To handle expressions, the optimiser might have to change the evaluation plan. For example, the tree structure in join order may not be efficient if indices are present during insertions.