# Lecture 37

> `07-04-22`

## Timestamp Ordering Protocol

The timestamp-ordering protocol guarantees serialisability since all the arcs in the precedence graph are of the form having nodes with edges from smaller timestamp to larger timestamp. This protocol ensures freedom from deadlock as no transaction ever waits. However, the schedule may not be cascade free and may not even be recoverable.

To make it recoverable, we have the following solutions

- All the writes are done at the end of the timestamp. A transaction that aborts is restarted with a new timestamp.
- Limited form of locking - wait for data to be committed before reading it
- Use commit dependencies to ensure responsibility.

## Thomas’ Write Rule

Modified version of the TSO in which obsolete **write** operations may be ignored under certain circumstances. When a transaction items to write to a data item Q which will be rewritten by another transaction, then the original write is considered as obsolete. $$TS(T) < W_\text{timestamp}(Q)$$. So, rather than rolling back the original transaction as the TSO does, we ignore the write operation in the original transaction. In this way, Thomas’ Write Rules allows greater potential concurrency. It allows some view serialisable schedules that are not conflict-serialisable.

The rule comes into the picture in case of **blind writes** - A write is done without a preceding read.

## Validation Based Protocol

It uses timestamps, but they are not pre-decided. The validation is performed at commit time to detect any out-of-serialisation order reads/writes. It is also known as **optimistic concurrency control** since transaction executes fully in the hope that all will go well during validation. This is done in three phases

- Read and execution phase. Writes are done to temporary variables.
- Validation phase
- Write phase

Each transaction has 3 timestamps corresponding to start of execution, validation phase, and write phase. The validation time stamps are used in the protocol. In validation, we check that for all $$T_i, T_j$$ such that $$TS(T_i) < TS(T_j)$$, one of the following must hold

- $$finishTS(T_i) < startTS(T_j)$$
- $$startTS(T_j) < finishTS(T_i) < validationTS(T_j)$$ and the set of data items written by $$T_i$$ does not intersect with the set of data items read by $$T_j$$.

This is when the validation succeeds. 

## Multiversion Concurrency Control

Multiversion schemes keep old versions of data item to increase concurrency. There are variants such as

- Multiversion Timestamp Ordering
- Multiversion Two-Phase Locking
- Snapshot isolation

The key ideas are that

- Each successful write results in the creation of a new version that labeled using timestamps.
- When a read operation is issued, we select the appropriate timestamp based on the timestamp of transaction issuing read and return the value of the selected version.

### Multiversion Timestamp ordering

Each data item $$Q$$ has a sequence of versions $$< Q_1, \dots, Q_n>$$ each of which have

- Content
- Write timestamp
- Read timestamp

If $$T$$ issues a read or write, let $$Q_k$$ be the version with the highest <u>write</u> timestamp that has a value less than the timestamp of $$T$$. Then for a read, we return the value from $$Q_k$$, and for a write we overwrite if both the timestamps are equal. We roll back $$T$$ if $$TS(T) < R\_timestamp$$. Otherwise, we simply create a new entry.

Like the basic TSP, recoverability is not ensured.

### Multiversion Two-Phase Locking

Differentiates between read-only transactions and update transactions. Update transactions follow rigorous two-phase locking. Read of a data item returns the latest version of the item. The first write of $$Q$$ by $$T$$ results in creation of a new version $$Q_i$$ and the timestamp is updated after the completion of the transaction. After the transaction $$T$$ completes, $$TS(T_i) = \texttt{ts-counter} + 1$$ and $$W\_timestamp(Q) = TS(T_i)$$ for all versions of $$Q$$ that it creates. Then, the `ts-counter` is incremented. All of this must be done atomically.

In read only transactions, `ts-counter` is assigned to the timestamp. As a result, only serialisable schedules are produced.

The issues with multiversion schemes are they increase storage overhead and there are issues with keys constraint checking and indexing with multiple versions.

## Snapshot Isolation

A transaction $$T$$ executing with snapshot isolation

- Takes snapshot of the committed data at start
- Always reads/modified data in its own snapshot
- Updates of concurrent transactions are not visible to $$T$$
- Writes of $$T$$ are complete when it commits

So, **first committer wins** rule is being used. **Serialisable snapshot isolation (SSI)** is an extension that ensures serialisability. However, there are some anomalies in this.