# Lecture 38

> `11-04-22`

# ~Chapter 19: 

A transaction failure can occur as a result of 

- logical errors - internal error condition in the transaction. These can be somewhat prevented by `assert` statements.
- system error - database must terminate the transaction due to errors like deadlock.

**System crash** - Occurs due to a power failure, hardware or software failure. A **failstop assumption** refers to the assumptions that non-volatile storage contents are not corrupted by a system crash. A **disk failure** destroys disk storage.

Logging helps in recovery. To recover from failure, we first find inconsistent blocks by

- We compare two copies of every disk block which is expensive, or
- Use logs sort of mechanism

and then overwrite the inconsistent blocks. We also need to ensure atomicity despite failures. 

## Log-Based Recovery

A **log** is a sequence of log records that keep information of update activities on the database. When transaction $$T$$ starts, it registers itself by writing $$(T start)$$ log record. Before $$T$$ executes $$write(X)$$, it writes a log record $$(T, X, V_1, V_2)$$. Upon finishing the last statement, the log record $$(T commit)$$ is written. There are two approaches using log

- Immediate database modification - write to buffer which will write to disk when before the transaction commits. Log record is written before database item is written.
- Deferred database modification - writes are done only after commit. Not used frequently.

<u>A transaction is said to have committed when its commit log record is output to stable storage.</u> Also, the log records are interleaved for concurrent transactions.



## Concurrency Control and Recovery

We assume that if a transaction $$T$$ has modified an item, no other transaction can modify the same item until $$T$$ has committed or aborted. This is equivalent to *strict two phase locking*.

- $$undo(T_i)$$ restores the value of all data items updated by $$T_i$$ to their old values, going backwards from the last log record for $$T_i$$. For each restoration, we add a log record of $$(T_i, X, V)$$. When undo of a transaction is complete, a log record $$(T_i abort)$$ is written out.
- $$redo(T_i)$$ sets the value of all data items updated by $$T_i$$ to the new values, going forward from the first log record of $$T_i$$. The log is unchanged here.

## Recovering from Failure

When recovering from failure, 

- Transaction $$T_i$$ needs to be undone if the log contains the record $$(T_i start)$$ but does not contain $$(T_i commit)$$ or $$(T_i abort)$$
- It needs to be redone if it contains $$(T_i start)$$ and $$(T_i commit)$$ or $$(T_i abort)$$.

Note that the second step is wasteful in some cases. We recovered before, and we are doing it again. This is known as **repeating history**.

### Checkpoints

Processing the entire log can be slow. We streamline recovery procedures by periodically performing checkpointing.

- Output all log records currently residing in the main memory onto stable storage
- Output all modified buffer blocks to the disk
- Write a log record $$(checkpoint L)$$ onto stable storage where $$L$$ is a  list of all transactions active at the time of checkpoint
- All updates are stopped while doing checkpointing.

The log records before a checkpoint are not needed!  

