# Lecture 1 `03-08-2022`

When it comes to security, security engineers often tend to be pessimistic - they pretend as if the worst is going to happen. They design the security systems assuming that the attacker has great power and a plethora of resources.

### Risk Management

We cannot build a security system which is resilient to all possible attacks. This is because, there are tradeoffs involved in designing security. For example, if we disconnect the machine from the internet, the confidentiality increases but availability decreases. The most common tradeoff that comes across is that of usability vs security.

While dealing with security, we primarily have these *assets* - Data, Systems, Facilities, and People. These assets have *vulnerabilities* that often presents *threats*. Together, these are known as *risks*, and we can deal with risks in the following ways

- Avoid - Prevent the attack
- Mitigate - Allay the damage
- Share - Claim the damage
- Retain - Bear the damage

In practice, we utilise multiple countermeasures - layered defence.

## Modern Cryptography

The use cases for cryptography has evolved over time. Previously, it was used for messages and the encoding algorithm was kept secret. However, we now see cryptography in everyday use and the encoding algorithm is kept open!

> Source authentication comes under integrity

A typical confidentiality set up in classical cryptography looks like the following 

- A message in clear text is encrypted and a **cipher** is produced
- The cryptographic algorithm is generally a mathematical function used for encryption and decryption
- Anyone who knows the algorithm can decode the cipher to produce the original message

The issue with this approach is that it is not scalable - the algorithm cannot be kept secret for a large user base. Additionally, the cost of implementation might varies and there is no quality control.

In contrast, modern cryptography makes use of a **key** for encoding and decoding text. The algorithm is kept public, and each encryption/decryption is unique to a key known to the user. Another key difference is that modern cryptography works with bits instead of alphabet. The domain of the key is usually large. The advantage of keeping the algorithm open is that it can be analysed by experts who can provide insights into the flaws of the method. Now, we shall discuss some of the basic ciphers in the context of modern cryptography.

#### Substitution Cipher

The algorithm in this regime is simply transforming letters in a text using a mapping from the alphabet to itself (the key). It is easy to see that there are $26! \approx 10^{26}$ possibilities - which is a very large number. However, it is often possible to partially decode the encoded script by performing **frequency analysis** on the cipher. For example, if ‘xfg’ is the most common occurring triplet in the encoded text, there is a strong possibility that 

Frequency analysis Two solutions: include whitespace and punctuation, and

Polygram substitution cipher -  

#### Polyalphabetic Cipher

The example is Vigenére cipher. Running key cipher. Shift alphabet by the given key

#### Transposition Ciphers

In this method, a **scytale** (a wooden cylinder) is used for transposing letters in the plain text. The text is taken as a strip and rolled over the scytale. It is then unrolled in a different way utilising a key. 

Soon enough, encryption was mechanised in the form of *rotor machines*. For example, Enigma was used by the Germans in WWII. 

### Building blocks

- **Confusion** - Transform information in plain text so that it is not easy to extract

- **Diffusion** - Spread information from a region of plaintext much by 

- **One way functions** - These functions are easy to compute but difficult to invert (**hashes**). Sometimes, it is possible to invert the function with a key (asymmetric key algorithm). For example, multiple two prime numbers is easy, but factoring a number into two primes is very difficult. Another example is the **discrete logarithm** - Find $x$ where $$a^x = b \text{(mod n)}$$. 

In the following discourse, we will consider asymmetric key and hashes (not applicable to symmetric keys). 

### Confidentiality Background

When two machines, say server and web browser, want to communicate then there are other players who can ... the confidentiality of the communication

- Passive attackers who can listen but not modify a message
- Active attacker can modify, substitute and replay the message

How do we ensure these attackers don’t get the access?

- Symmetric key - The machines have to share a key `k` apriori (this also has to be done securely)
- Asymmetric key - This concept is quite intriguing. There are two keys involved - public and private. Suppose Alice is sending a message to Bob. Bob has access to a public key (known to everyone even attackers) and a private key (only Bob knows). Alice encrypts the message using the public key, and Bob decrypts the cipher using the private key. The caveat here is that the cipher cannot be decrypted using the public key. That means, even Alice can’t decrypt the cipher after encryption (but she doesn’t need to!).

## Cryptoanalysis

It is the science of recovering plaintext of a message without a key - can recover the plain text or the key itself (much more powerful). In situations where this is not possible, the weaknesses in the implementation (**side-channel attack**) are usually exploited. 

In cryptoanalysis, we have an assumption by A. Kerckhoff - Attacker knows complete details of the algorithm and the implementation. We also assume that the attackers have complete access the communication medium between the sender and receiver.



