# Lecture 2

There are different types of attacks that are in the discourse of cryptoanalysis

- Total break - where the key `k` is deduced
- Global Deduction - Decrypt using alternate algorithm without knowing `k`
- Instance deduction - where only one instance of encryption can be decrypted (`c1 -> m1, c2 -/> m2`)
- Information deduction - where the message is partially deduced

Another classification of attacks is as follows

- Cipher text only - The attacker only has a set of ciphers `<c_i>`. This situation comes up when the attacker is spying on encrypted channels.
- Known plaintext - The attacker has a set of cipher text pairs `<c_i, m_i>` and they try to deduce `m` for a new `c`. The attacker usually does not have any flexibility on `m_i`s
- Chosen plaintext - The attacker can explicitly design the plaintext to gain insights. 
- Adaptive Chosen plain text - This is basically the above category but `m_{i + 1}` is decided from `<c_i, m_i>`.
- Chosen cipher text - The attacker chooses the cipher text
- Rubberhose cryptoanalysis - The attacker physically attacks the organisation (beating or blackmailing) to get the key.

We’ve seen different types of attacks, but how complex are these attacks? We shall discuss this under the topic of attack complexity where we will discuss data, storage, CPU/time usage for the attack.

The term **unconditionally secure** refers to the property of a cipher being uncrackable even with *infinite resources*. For example, one time pad is unconditionally secure but it is not used in real life. Most unconditionally secure ciphers cannot be actualised in real life. As an alternative, we use **computationally secure** ciphers. These are ciphers that can be broken using brute force - eventually some system can crack it. However, the brute force space is decided by the domain of the key and this is chosen such that even with the resources available now or in the future, there won’t be enough time to crack it. For instance, if we choose a 128-bit cipher and assume a typical computer can run 1e6 operations per second, it would take approximately 1e32 seconds to decrypt it! We prefer to use computationally secure ciphers in real life which have easy encryption and decryption given we have the key.

Before we move on, we will briefly describe ***one time pads***. This system was used by US & Soviet Union in the olden days. The algorithm is simple - given a message and a key, the cipher is given by the **xor** between the message and the key. To obtain the message from the cipher, we simple xor the cipher with key again. Such an effortless algorithm is ‘perfect’! Why? A given cipher can have multiple plain text messages which seem ‘valid’. Also, the key is *one-time* because if the key is repeated, then the encryption breaks down. So, if the method is so perfect, why don’t we use it?

- The key exchange is difficult - the key sequence is the same length as the message
- Synchronization problem - the method is not robust to errors
- Not malleable - a change to the cipher text can change the plain text - confidential but not integrable

## Symmetric algorithms

In this paradigm, only a single key can be used in the two channels of communication (`A -> B, B -> A`). There are two types -

- **Stream cycle** - The characters in the cipher can be decrypted independent of the remaining text in the cipher. For example, substitution cipher. These are easy to encrypt and are less error prone. However, they have high diffusion
- **Block cycle** - The characters in the cipher have some sort of dependency with each other. We can only decrypt the cipher if we receive the whole cipher. For example, Transposition cipher

> What’s confusion and diffusion?

We will mostly be talking about block ciphers. There is some notation we need to discuss -

- Block length - Refers to the cipher size in bits
- Key length - The key size in bits

For example, DES has a 56 bit key and a 64 bit message, and AES has a 128 bit message and key length varying between 128, 196 and 256. The following properties are of interest for any encryption/decryption scheme

- Correctness - `P_2` should not map to `C_1` - This does not usually happen. `P_1` should not map to both `C_1` and `C_2`. This is ensured by keeping a constant key-space.
- Efficiency
- Secure - A random key permutation should have a very low chance of being correct. To achieve this, the ciphers should have these properties -
  - Any cipher should have roughly equal number of 0’s and 1’s
  - Suppose we have a set of ciphers and we consider the `n`th bit in all these ciphers - then this set should also have roughly equal number of 0’s and 1’s
  - Even if the messages have a single bit difference, the ciphers should have roughly half the bits different

> something about keyspace and plaintext space was discussed, couldn’t follow

Since, the above is infeasible, the practical implementation follows this approach - The 64 bit input is divided into chunks of 8 bits and confusion is achieved via *S-box* that implements substitution. The substitution table may not be a function of the key (e.g. DES/AES). The table in this case would just have $8*2^8$ bits. The diffusion is then achieved via *P-box* that implements permutation - the bits are scrambled, may not depend on the key and required $64\log_2 64$ bits. Many *rounds* ensure each plaintext input bit affects most ciphertext output bits. 

### Data Encryption Standard (DES)

This method was designed by IBM in 1977. They used 56-bit key (8 bit parity, NSA controversy) and an 64-bit input block. It is efficient to implement in hardware, and slow in software (likely done on purpose). In today’s world, DES is easy to decrypt. 3DES is more secure where the ciphertext = $$E_{k_3}(D_{k_2}(E_{k_1}(text)))$$.

### Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)

The key in DES is too small and hence easy to break. 3DES is secure but not easy to implement. In sometime back in the history, NIST opened a contest for a new standard of enryption that was efficient, flexible, secure and feee to implement. Among 15 countries, *Rijndael* won the championship even after it being not very secure (but was easy to implement). This scheme was later relabelled as AES.

This scheme is designed resist linear and differential cryptoanalysis, and the only known practical attacks for AES is a *side-channel attack*. For example, the attacker can monitor the time taken to access the data in the table. If accessed faster, the values might have been visited before and otherwise not. These insights are used to decrypt the messages. However, as can be understood, these are very complicated.