# Introduction
The content on this article is based on the [course](https://github.com/pearls-lab/ai-agents-course) by [Prof. Prithviraj](https://prithvirajva.com) at UC San Diego. This [whitepaper](https://www.kaggle.com/whitepaper-agents) about AI Agents by Google is also a good read.

## What is an agent?
Agent is an entity with *agency*. [A Minecraft agent?](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Agent).
Agents see applications within the workspaces in the form of workflow automations, household or commercial robotics, software development and personal assistants. Generally, the theme is that *agents* take actions. 

Historically, the use of agents started in the early 1900s in the field of control theory. They were used for dynamic control of flight systems, and in 1940s it expanded to flight guidance, etc. By the 1950s the concepts of MDPs and dynamic programming were being expanded to many use cases. Surprisingly, one of the first natural language chatbots, Eliza, was created as a psychotherapist simulator in the 1960s! Finally, reinforcement learning became a field of study in the 1990s for sequential decision making.

## Sequential Decision Making
These tasks are different from other ML problems like classification. A model that has an accuracy of 99% at each step, has a cumulative accuracy of ~30% after 120 steps!
 
These problems are formalized as a Markov Decision Process - an **agent** performs **actions** in an **environment**, and in turn receives **rewards** as feedback. These configurations are distinguished as **states**, and the whole process can be seen as sequential decision making.

The core components of an agent, often agreed on, are
- **Grounding** - Language is anchored to *concepts* in the world. Language can be grounded to different forms of information systems - images, actions and cultural norms.
    - Agency (ability to act) - At each state, an agent needs to have multiple choices to act. *If an agent has to select what tools to use but there’s always only one tool, is that agency?* The action space has to be well-defined to look for agency. Although there is a single tool call, different parameters for the tool call can probably be considered as different actions. Actions can be defined as something the agent does and changes the environment. The distinction between an agent and environment is not very clear in many cases. Although, our approximations mostly serve us well.
    - Planning (Long horizon) 
    - Memory - 
        - Short-term - What is the relevant information around the agent that it needs to use to act now
        - Long term - What information has the agent already gathered that it can retrieve to take an action
    - Learning (from feedback) - Doesn’t necessarily always mean *backpropagation*.
- **Additional** - 
    - Embodiment (physically acting in the real-world). *Embodied hypothesis* - embodiment is necessary for AGI.
    - Communication - Can the agent communicate its intentions to other agents. Very necessary pre-requisite for multi-agent scenarios. 
    - World Modeling - Given the state of the world and an actions, predict the next state of the world. Is [Veo](https://deepmind.google/technologies/veo/veo-2/)/[Sora](https://sora.com) a world model? It is an attempt for world model since they have no verifiability. [Genie](https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/genie-2-a-large-scale-foundation-world-model/) is another such attempt. So is [Genesis](https://genesis-embodied-ai.github.io) - this is much better if it works.
    - Multi-modality - The clean text on the internet is only a few terabytes, and our models have consumed it (took use 2 decades though). YouTube has 4.3 Petabytes of new videos a day. CERN generates 1 Petabyte a day (modalities outside vision and language). Some people believe this form of scaling is the way to go.
There are more distinctions - 

| Model | AI System | Agent |
|---|---|---|
| GPT-4 | ChatGPT | ChatGPT computer use |
| Forward passes of a neural net | Mixing models together | Has agency |

It is important to remember that not every use case needs an agent and most use cases just need models or AI systems. *Occam’s razor*.


