# Lecture 01 `03-01-22`

## Overview

Consider the problem of determining whether a given multivariate polynomial with integer coefficients has integer roots. This problem is *undecidable* - we cannot write a deterministic algorithm which halts in finite time that always gives the correct answer for a given polynomial. We will explore various techniques and theorems through the course to answer questions like these. 

***Example.*** Consider the language $$L_1 = \{a^nb^m: n,m \geq 0\}$$. Consider the problem of deciding whether a word is present in this language or not. We can write such a program using a DFA of the form

***Example.*** Suppose we have $$L_2 = \{a^nb^n: n \geq 0\}$$. Can we construct a DFA for the same? 

It can be shown that such a language cannot be represented using a DFA. Instead, we use an instrument known as ***pushdown automaton***. 

A *pushdown automaton* has a stack associated with a DFA. Every transition in the automaton describes an operation such as "push" and "pop" on the stack. A string is accepted by the automaton if the stack is empty at the end of the string. The languages accepted by such automatons are known as ***context-free grammar***.

***Example.*** Extending the previous example, consider the language $$L_3 = \{a^nb^nc^n:n \geq 0\}$$. Turns out, a pushdown automaton cannot represent this language.

We have a ***Turing machine*** that represents the ultimate computer that can perform any computation (not all). This machine has a 'tape' associated with it along with different decisions at each section of the tape. The languages associated with these machines are known as ***unrestricted grammar***.

These machines and the associated languages can be represented using a diagram known as [Chomsky hierarchy](#chomsky-hierarchy). We will also prove that adding non-determinism affects the expressive power of PDAs but not of DFAs and TMs.