# Lecture 02 

> `04-01-22`

***Definition.*** A *finite state automaton* is defined as a tuple $$(Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$$, where 

- $$Q$$ is a finite non-empty set of states,
- $$\Sigma$$ is the alphabet with a set of symbols,
- $$\delta: Q \times \delta \to Q$$ is the state-transition function,
- $$q_0 \in Q$$ is the initial state, and
- $$F \subseteq Q$$ is the set of accepting states.

***Example.*** Let us consider the language $$L_2 = \{a^nb^n:n\geq 0\}$$ we saw before. How do we write the *context-free grammar* for this language? We write a set of <u>base cases and inductive rules</u> as follows - 

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
\begin{align}
S &\to \epsilon \\
S &\to aSb
\end{align}
$$
 </div>Typically, we use $$S \to \epsilon$$ as the base case. We start out with the string $$S$$, and then use the above rules to keep replacing the $$S$$ until we obtain a string consisting only of *terminals*. Here, the symbols $$a, b,$$ and $$\epsilon$$ are terminals whereas $$S$$ is a non-terminal.

***Example.*** Consider the grammar of matched parentheses. This is given by -

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
\begin{align}
S &\to ()\\
S &\to (S)\\
S &\to SS
\end{align}
$$

</div>***Definition.*** A *context-free grammar* is defined as a tuple $$(V, \Sigma, R, S)$$, where

- $$V$$ is a set of *non-terminals* or *variables*,
- $$\Sigma$$ is the alphabet,
- $$R: V \to (V \cup \Sigma)^*$$ is the finite set of *rules*, and
- $$S \in V$$ is the *start* symbol.

The language of a given grammar is the set of all strings derivable using the rules.

***Example.*** Consider the language $$\{a^nb^nc^n: n > 0\}$$. This can be represented by the unrestricted grammar as -

<div style='text-align:center;'> 


$$
\begin{align}
S &\to abc \\
S &\to aAbc \\
Ab &\to bA \\
Ac &\to Bbcc \\
bB &\to Bb \\
aB &\to aa \\
aB &\to aaA
\end{align}
$$
</div>These set of rules are very similar to CFG except for the fact that, now,  we have strings on the LHS too. Notice how $$A, B$$ are used to convey information across the string when new $$a$$'s or $$b$$'s are added. 

> ***Homework.*** Write the unrestricted grammar rules for the language $$L = \{a^{n^2} : n \in \Z^+\}$$ 

***Definition.*** An *unrestricted grammar* is defined as a tuple $$(V, \Sigma, R, S)$$, where

- $$V$$ is a set of *non-terminals* or *variables*,
- $$\Sigma$$ is the alphabet,
- $$R: (V \cup \Sigma)^* \to (V \cup \Sigma)^*$$ is the finite set of *rules*, and
- $$S \in V$$ is the *start* symbol.

***Definition.*** *Regular expressions* are defined by the following set of rules - 

1. $$\phi, \{\epsilon\}, \{a\}$$ (for any $$a \in \Sigma$$) are regular expressions.

2. If $$E_1, E_2$$ are regular expressions,

   1. $$E_1 + E_2$$ (union),
   2. $$E_1E_2$$ (concatenation)
   3. $$E_1^*$$ (**Kleene star**), and
   4. $$(E_1)$$ (parenthesis)

   are all regular expressions.

***Example.*** Consider $$L = \{\text{strings with even number of a's}\}$$. This can be represented using the regular expression $$b^*(ab^*ab^*)^*$$. 

> ***Homework.*** Suppose $$L$$ is restricted to have only an odd number of $$b$$'s. How do we write the regular expression for this language?

In general, PDAs are represented as a Finite State Machine. That is, we have an action associated with each transition. An empty stack is denoted using the symbol $$Z_0$$. That is, the stack begins with a single symbol $$Z_0$$. Each transition is represented as $$l, A$$, where $$l$$ is a letter and $$A$$ is an action such as

- $$X \vert aX$$ - push
- $$aX \vert X$$ - pop
- $$W\vert Wa$$ - not sure what this is

Now, a string is rejected by the FSM in two scenarios -

1. There is no transition defined at the current state for the current symbol in the string, and
2. The stack is not empty, i.e. popping the stack does not yield $$Z_0$$ at the end of the string input.

