# Lecture 8

> `18-01-22`

## Decision Properties

### Membership Problem

Does $$w \in L$$? How do we show that this problem is decidable? The algorithm is well-known.

### Emptiness Problem

Is $$L(M) = \phi$$? This problem can be solved using *reachability* in graphs. One can check if the final states are reachable from the start state. It can be achieved using **fixed point**. This method is essentially propagating the frontier from the start state. We add neighbors of all the states in the current frontier and keep expanding it. We do this until our frontier does not change. This frontier is the fixed point.

### Infiniteness Problem

Is $$L(M)$$ finite? We need to search for a loop in the graph to answer this question. Suppose our DFA has $$N$$ states. If the DFA accepts a string whose length is greater than or equal to $$N$$, then a state has to repeat while forming this string. This observation is a result of the **Pigeonhole principle**.

This check is both necessary and sufficient. If a language is infinite, then it means that it has a string of length greater than $$N$$. How are we going to use this property to check the infiniteness of the language? Is there a decidable algorithm?

***Claim.*** If there is a string of length $$\geq N$$ in $$L$$, then there is a string of length between $$N$$ and $$2N - 1$$. Think about the proof. *Clue.* Think of the longest string that you can create without using any loop in the DFA.

It is sufficient to test for the membership of all strings of length between $$N$$ and $$2N - 1$$. 

## Pumping Lemma

***Problem.*** Show that $$L = \{a^nb^n\}$$ is not regular. 

We use proof by contradiction. Assume that a $$DFA(M)$$ with $$N$$ states accepts $$L$$.

***Theorem.*** *Pumping Lemma*. For every regular language $$L$$, there exists an integer $$n$$ , called the *pumping length*, where every string $$ w \in L$$ of length $$\geq n$$ can be written as  $$w = xyz$$ where



$$
\begin{align}
\vert xy \vert &\leq n \\
\vert y\vert &> 0\\
\forall i \geq 0,\ &  x(y)^iz \in L
\end{align}
$$



Let us understand this by proving $$L = \{a^nb^n \vert n > 0\}$$ is not regular using contradiction. Assume there is a $$DFA(M)$$ with $$N$$ states that accepts $$L$$. 

Now, consider the string $$a^Nb^N$$. Now, define $$a^n$$ as $$xy$$. Let $$x = a^j$$ and $$y = a^k$$ where $$n \leq N$$. According to the pumping lemma, $$a^j(a^k)^ib^N \in L$$. Therefore, there can’t exist a DFA that represents $$L$$.

> ***Homework.*** Prove that the language with equal number of $$a$$‘s and $$b$$’s is not regular.
>
> The idea is to use closure properties.

> ***Homework.*** Prove the pumping lemma.
>
> *Answer.* Consider a DFA$$(Q, \Sigma, Q_0, \delta, F)$$ with $$N$$ states, and a word $$w$$ such that $$\vert w \vert = T \geq N$$ belongs to $$L$$. Now, let $$(S_i)_{i =0}^T$$ (0 - indexed) be the sequence of states traversed by $$w$$. The state $$S_L$$ is an accepting state as $$w \in L$$. Also, there exist $$0 \leq i < j \leq N$$ such that $$S_i = S_j$$ as there are only $$N$$ states in the DFA (Pigeonhole principle). Now, define the string formed by $$S_0, \dots, S_i$$ as $$x$$, the one formed by $$S_i, \dots, S_j$$ as y, and that formed by $$S_j, \dots, S_T$$ as $$z$$. We have $$w = xyz$$. Also, $$\vert y \vert > 0$$ as $$i < j$$ and $$\vert xy \vert \leq N$$ as $$j \leq N$$.
>
> Since $$S_i = S_j$$, we can *pump* the string $$y$$ as many times as we wish by traversing cycle $$S_i, \dots, S_j$$. Now, since $$S_T \in F$$, the string formed by the sequence $$S_0, \dots, \{S_i, \dots, S_j\}^t,  \dots, S_T$$ ($$t \geq 0$$) also belongs to $$L$$. This word is equivalent to $$xy^iz$$. $$\blacksquare$$

