# Lecture 11

> `25-01-22` There were no lecture 9 and 10

## NFA $$\equiv$$ DFA

We convert a NFA to DFA using **subset construction**. That is, if $$Q$$ is the set of states in the NFA, then $$2^Q$$ will the set of states in the DFA. Initially, we construct the start states using the subset of start states in the NFA. Then, we build the following states in the DFA by tracing all the states reached by each character in the NFA into a single subset. If any of the subset consists of a final state, then that subset state is made into a final state in the DFA. 

This equivalence can also be extended to show the equivalence of NFA-$$\epsilon$$ and $$DFA$$.

## DFA Minimization

All DFAs with minimal number of states are **isomorphic**.

### Distinguishable states

Consider a DFA $$(Q, \Sigma, Q_0, \delta, F) $$. States $$q_i,q_j \in Q$$ are said to be distinguishable iff there exists a word $$w \in \Sigma^*$$ such that  $$\delta(q_1, w) \not \in F$$ and $$\delta(q_2, w) \in F$$ or vice versa.

One can merge indistinguishable states to minimize a DFA.

## Context-Free Grammar 

Let us try to write the grammar for the language $$L = \{a^ib^jc^k \vert i = j \text{ or } j = k\}$$. Consider the following rules


$$
\begin{align}
S &\to S_1 \vert S_2 \\
S_1 &\to aS_1bC \vert C \\
S_2 &\to AbS_2c \vert \epsilon \\
C &\to cC \vert \epsilon \\
A &\to aA \vert \epsilon

\end{align}
$$


In general, union is straightforward to write in CFG due to rules like rule 1. However, there is an ambiguity in the above rules. For example, the word $$a^3b^3c^3$$ can be generated using different derivations. We’ll discuss this later in the course.

As we discussed before, a context free grammar $$G$$ is defined by $$(V, \Sigma, R, S)$$. A string is accepted by the grammar if $$w \in \Sigma^*$$ and $$R \xrightarrow{*} w$$. That is, the rules must be able to *derive* $$w$$. 

A one-step derivation is given by $$u_1Au_2 \to u_1\beta u_2$$ if $$A \to \beta \in R$$ and $$u_1, u_2 \in (V \cup \Sigma)^*$$. 

Consider the set of rules for defining arithmetic expressions. The language is defined over $$\Sigma = \{+, -, \times, \div, x, y, z, \dots\}$$. 


$$
\begin{align}
S &\to x \vert y \vert z \\
S &\to S + S \\
S &\to S - S \\
S &\to S \times S \\
S &\to S \div S \\
S &\to (S)
\end{align}
$$


Now, for an expression such $$x + y \times z$$, we can give a left-most derivation or a right-most derivation. A precedence order removes ambiguities in the derivation. In programming languages, a parser removes these ambiguities using some conventions.

>  ***Homework.*** Try and write the set of rules for the language which consists of $$a$$s and $$b$$s such that every string has twice the number of $$a$$s as that of $$b$$s.
>
> *Answer.* We try to write the rules for equal number of a’s and b’s, and try to extend them.
>
> 
> $$
> \begin{align}
> S &\to \epsilon \\
> S &\to aSb \ \vert \ Sab \ \vert \ abS \\
> S &\to bSa \ \vert \ Sba \ \vert \ baS
> \end{align}
> $$
> 
>
> Does this work?

**Note.** $$\vert R \vert$$ is finite.

