<!-- # Lecture 13 -->

How do we take a grammar and produce the normal form of the grammar? We shall learn techniques such as eliminating useless symbols, elimination epsilon and unit productions. These will be used to get the designable form of the grammar that can also be used to show languages which are context-free using the pumping lemma. 

The notation $$\alpha_1 \xrightarrow{n} \alpha_2$$ is used to denote that $$\alpha_2$$ can be derived from $$\alpha_1$$ in $$n$$ steps. The $$*$$ over the arrow represents the derivative closure of the rules.

Grammars $$G_1, G_2$$ are equivalent iff $$L(G_1) = L(G_2)$$. For example, we have seen two grammars for the language $$L = \text{ strings with } \#a = \#b$$, and they are both equivalent.

### Derivation trees

- Trees whose all roots are labeled.
- The root of the tree is labeled with the start symbol of the grammar $$S$$.
- Suppose A is the label of some internal node, then A has a children $$X_1, \dots X_R$$ iff $$A \to X_1\dots X_R \in R$$.
- $$\epsilon$$ can only be the label of leaf nodes.

### Derivations

Grammars with multiple derivation trees are ambiguous. Are there languages for which any grammar is ambiguous? Such languages are called as **inherently ambiguous**.

> ***Homework.*** Find examples of inherently ambiguous grammars.

## Simplifying grammars

***Definition.*** A variable $$B$$ is productive in $$G$$ iff $$B \xrightarrow[G]{*} w$$ for some $$w \in \Sigma^*$$.

***Definition.*** A variable $$B$$ is reachable from the start symbol $$S$$ of $$G$$ if $$S \xrightarrow[G]{*} \alpha B \beta$$ for some $$\alpha, \beta \in (\Sigma \cup V)^*$$. 

We useful variable $$X$$ is productive and reachable. These are necessary conditions but not sufficient. For example, consider the following grammar.

```
S -> AB
A -> c
```

Here, $$A$$ is useless even if it is productive and reachable.

***Definition.*** A variable $$X$$ is useless if there is no derivation tree that gives $$w \in \Sigma^*$$ from $$S$$ with $$X$$ as the label of some internal node. 

### Fixed point algorithm

The idea is to find a monotonic algorithm which gives us the set of useful symbols at the fixed point of the underlying function.

Firstly, let us try this for productive variables. We propose the following algorithm.


$$
\begin{align}
P_0 &= \phi \\ 
P_i &\to P_{i + 1} \\
&\triangleq P_i \cup \{N \mid N \to \alpha \in R \text{ and } \alpha \in (\Sigma \cup P_i)^*  \}
\end{align}
$$



For example, consider the grammar

```
S -> AB | AA
A -> a
B -> bB
-- The algorithm
P_o = \phi
P_1 = {A} // Rule 2
P_2 = {A, S} // Rule 1
P_3 = {A, S}
```

Therefore, the symbols $$S, A$$ are productive in the above grammar. We propose a similar algorithm for reachable states in the grammar.


$$
\begin{align}
R_0 &= \phi \\ 
R_i &\to R_{i + 1} \\
&\triangleq R_i \cup \{P \mid Q \to \alpha P \beta; \alpha, \beta \in (\Sigma \cup P_i)^*  \text{ and } Q \in R_i\}
\end{align}
$$


***Definition.*** A **nullable** symbol is a symbol which can derive $$\epsilon$$. These symbols can be eliminated.

***Definition.*** A unit production is a rule of the form $$A \to B$$ where $$ A, B \in V$$. 