# Lecture 15

> `03-02-22`

Consider a grammar in Chomsky form. The derivation tree will consist of nodes with either 2 children ($$A \to BC$$), 1 child ($$A \to a$$) or leaf nodes. 

Let the longest path in the derivation tree be $$k$$. Then, the upper bound on the length of the word formed is $$2k$$ and lower bound is $$k$$. **Note.** The variables from $$V$$ can repeat across a path.

## Pumping Lemma for CFG

For any CFL $$L$$, the language $$L - \{\epsilon \}$$ has a Chomsky Normal form grammar. 

***Theorem.*** *Pumping Lemma* For every CFL $$L$$, there is a $$n$$ such that for all strings $$\vert z \vert \geq n$$ with $$z \in L(G)$$, there are strings $$u, v, w, x, y$$ such that $$z = uvwxy$$ and

-  $$\vert vwx \vert \leq n$$
-  $$\vert vx \vert \geq 1$$
- for all $$z_i = u v^iwx^iy$$, $$i \geq 0$$, $$z_i \in L(G)$$.

It is easy to show $$L = \{a^nb^nc^n \mid n \geq 1\}$$ is not a CFL using the above lemma.

### Proof of the lemma

If there is a $$z \in L(G)$$ such $$\vert z \vert \geq n = 2^k$$, then there must be a path of length at least $$k + 1$$. Now, due to pigeonhole principle, a variable must repeat in this path in the derivation tree of $$z$$. 

Now, consider the path $$S, \dots, A, \dots, A, \dots, a$$. 

- It is easy to the see that the word formed by the subtree below the first $$A$$ has length $$\leq n$$.
- Also, as there are 2 $$A$$s in the path, the number of letters in the “left” subtree and “right” subtree would be greater than 1.
- These “left” and “right” subtrees can be derived an arbitrary number of times as $$A$$ can be derived from $$A$$.

*Note.* To draw some more intuition, call the subtree formed by the first $$A$$ as $$T_1$$, and the subtree formed by the second $$A$$ as $$T_2$$. We shall label the word formed by $$T_2$$ as $$w$$, and the word labeled by $$T_1$$ as $$vwx$$.  Now, $$\vert vx \vert \geq 1$$. *Think.* The “left” and “right” subtree in the above explanation together are formed by the set $$T_1 \setminus T_2$$.

> ***Homework.*** Check whether the following can be represented by a CFG.
>
> -  $$L = \{a^ib^ic^j \mid j \geq i\}$$ - Yes
> -  $$L = \{a^ib^jc^k \mid i \leq j \leq k\}$$ - No *Hint*. The value of the power of repeating strings in the pumping lemma can be $$0$$.
> -  $$L = \{a^ib^jc^id^j \mid i, j \geq 1\}$$ - No

We shall see that 2 stacks PDA is the most expressive Turing machine.

> Can’t there be useless symbols in normal forms? yes -> $$S \to AB$$

## Ogden’s Lemma

This lemma is a generalization of pumping lemma. Consider the pumping lemma for the FSA. It basically said that some state must repeat for a string of length $$\geq n$$ in the language. Ogden’s lemma talks about a similar claim for CFGs. It will be formally discussed in the next lecture.

## Closure properties

The union, concatenation and Kleene closure of CFGs are also CFGs. Proof is left as a homework.

**Intersection** is not context-free!