# Lecture 16

> `07-02-22`

## Pushdown Automata

Consider the languages $$L_1 = \{wcw^R \mid w \in (0 + 1)^* \}$$ and $$L_3 = \{ww^R \mid w \in (0 + 1)^* \}$$. Let us build PDAs for these two models.

The stack of the PDA uses different symbols that those from $$\Sigma$$. We shall denote the superset of symbols of stack by $$T$$. Each transition in the PDA depends on the input symbol and the symbol on the top of the stack. These are similar to the FSA transition diagram. If both of these symbols are satisfied for the transition, we perform *an action* on the stack by pushing or popping symbols. Note that we can also choose to not perform any action.

We shall also use the symbol $$X$$ to denote ‘matching any character’ for the symbols on stack. We can also have $$\epsilon$$ transitions in non-deterministic PDAs. $$\epsilon$$ transitions basically denote ignoring input symbols. 

**Note.** We can push multiple symbols in each transition but we can only pop one symbol in each transition.

The PDA for $$L_1$$ is given by


$$
\begin{align}
\delta(q_1, c, X) &= (q_2, X) \\
\delta(q_1, 1, X) &= (q_1, GX) \\ 
\delta(q_1, 0, X) &= (q_1, BX)\\
\delta(q_2, 0, B) &= (q_2, \epsilon) \\
\delta(q_2, 1, G) &= (q_2, \epsilon) \\
\delta(q_2, \epsilon, Z_0) &= (q_2, \epsilon) \\
\end{align}
$$


The PDA for $$L_3$$ is similar but we cannot express this language without non-determinism. We can’t guess where the “middle of the string” occurs without *guessing*. Therefore, non-deterministic PDAs are more expressive than deterministic ones.

Remember that the non-deterministic PDA accepts a string if there is at least one run that accepts it.

### Formal definition of PDA

A Pushdown automata is formally given by the 7 element tuple $$M ( Q, \Sigma, T, \delta, q_0, Z_0, F )$$ where

- $$T$$ is the set of stack symbols
- $$Z_0$$ is a special symbol denoting the bottom of the stack
- $$F$$ is the set of final states of the automata
- $$\delta: Q \times (\Sigma \cup \epsilon) \times T \to (Q, \lambda)$$  where $$\lambda \in T^*$$ is an action performed on the transition. 

A string is accepted if one of the runs ends with an empty stack or at a final state. That is, $$L(M) = \{w \mid (q_0, w, Z_0) \vdash^*_M (p, \epsilon, \epsilon)\} \cup \{ w \mid (q_0, w, Z_0) \vdash^*_M (q, \epsilon, \lambda), q \in F\}$$. In the following lectures, we shall prove DPDA $$\neq$$ NPDA, ‘accepting by empty stack’ $$\equiv$$ ‘accepting by final state’ and PDA (NPDA) $$=$$ CFG.