<!-- # Lecture 17

> `08-02-22`

We shall continue the formal description of PDAs.  -->

We define a **move** or an **arrow** as a transition in the PDA. 

**Instantaneous Description** refers to the property of defining a system using a *single number*. In case of a PDA, the description is given by a numerical representation of (Current string, Remaining input tape, Stack content).  These values, that constitute the dynamic information of a PDA, keep changing during moves. The notation $$ID_1 \vdash_M ID_2$$ denotes a single transition in the PDA. The notation $$ID_1 \vdash^*_M ID_2$$ is a sequence of 0 or more moves.

We have seen the **accept criteria** in the last lecture. We will show that a PDA built on the final state accept criteria has an equivalent PDA built on the empty state accept criteria.

## Greibach Normal Form

CFGs of the form $$A \to a\alpha$$.

**Note.** $$\alpha$$ in the above expression consists of non-terminals only!

What are the challenges involved in converting a grammar to a Greibach normal form? It involves the following steps.

### Elimination of productions

Suppose we want to remove the rule $$A \to \alpha_1 B \alpha_2$$ and keep the language of the CFG same. Then, we consider all rules of the form $$B \to \beta$$ and replace each of them by $$A \to \alpha_1 \beta \alpha_2$$. After doing this, we can delete the initial production involving $$A$$.

### Left Recursion

Suppose we have rules of the form $$A \to A\alpha_1 \mid A\alpha_2 \mid \dots \mid A\alpha_r$$ which we wish to remove. Now, there would be other rules involving $$A$$ of the form $$A \to \beta_1 \mid \dots \mid \beta_s$$. 

Now, we define a new variable $$B \not\in V$$. Then, we write rules of the form $$A \to \beta_1B \mid \dots \mid \ \beta_s B$$ and $$ \beta \to \alpha_1 B \mid \dots \mid \alpha_r B$$. We can then remove all the left-recursive productions of $$A$$. Basically, we have replaced left-recursion rules with right-recursion rules.

### Ordering of Variables

Simplify the variables in one order? *Wasn’t taught?*

## Equivalence of PDA and CFG

Given any CFG $$G$$, we convert it into Greibach normal form. Then, we choose the non-terminals as the stack symbols. The initial symbol in the grammar is taken as the top symbol of the stack initially. For each rule $$A \to a\alpha$$ we write the transition $$\delta(q, a, A) = (q’, \alpha)$$.  We start with a single state in the DFA, and write all the rules on this state. Through this intuition, we have shown that every CFG has a corresponding PDA. Then, we need to show that every PDA has a corresponding CFG.

To show that CFG $$\subseteq$$ PDA, we need to show the equivalence of a language in both directions. That is, for every string accepted by the CFG, we need to show that the PDA also accepts it and vice versa. Note that we also have to prove PDA $$\subseteq$$ CFG.