# Lecture 18

> `10-02-22`

We will continue the equivalence proof now.

## Ogden’s Lemma revisited

Suppose we had to prove the language $$L = \{a^ib^jc^kd^l \mid i = 0 \text{ or } j = k = l\}$$ is not CFG. Can we do this using pumping lemma? No. *Think*.

We do this using Ogden’s lemma which goes something like this. You can give a $$z = z_1 \dots z_m$$ such that $$m \geq n$$. Now, we can mark positions by choosing a subset of $$z_i$$’s. Then, the $$vwx$$ from the pumping lemma must have at most $$n$$ marked positions and $$vx$$ has at least one marked position. This is a stronger condition as compared to the pumping lemma.

> ***Homework.*** Show that $$L = \{a^ib^jc^k \mid i \neq j, j \neq k, i \neq k\}$$ is not context-free using Ogden’s lemma.

## Closure properties of CFLs

- **Union** - $$L(G_1) \cup L(G_2)$$ regular? Yes. Add a rule $$S \to S_1 \mid S_2$$.
- **Kleene closure** - $$(L(G_1))^*$$ regular? Yes. Add a rule $$S \to S_1S \mid \epsilon$$.
- **Concatenation** - $$L(G_1). L(G_2)$$ regular? Yes. Add a rule $$S \to S_1 S_2$$.
- **Intersection** - Consider the example $$L_1 = \{a^ib^ic^j \mid i, j \geq 1\}$$ and $$L_2 = \{a^ib^jc^i \mid i, j \geq 1\}$$. Both of them are context free but their intersection is not.
- **Complement** - Easy to show from intersection.

## Decision properties of CFLs

### Is the language empty?

This is easy to check. Remove useless symbols and show that $$S$$ is useful.

### Is the language finite?

Consider the Chomsky normal form of the grammar. <u>Draw a graph corresponding to the grammar such that every node has a single edge directed to a terminal or two edges directed to non-terminals</u>. 

***Claim.*** If the graph has a cycle, then the language formed by the grammar is infinite. This is intuitive.

We can find cycles using DFS simply.We can derive more efficient methods which is not the goal of this course.

### Does a string belong to the language?

The first approach is the following. Get the Greibach form of the grammar. Now, for each letter $$c$$ in the string check whether there are rules of the form $$A \to c\alpha$$. We consider the values of all such $$\alpha$$s and continue parsing the rest of the input string. Therefore, at each letter in the string we limit the number of possible derivations. If we reach the end of the string without running out of possible derivations at each letter, then the string belongs to the language. Remember that we will start with the start symbol for the beginning of the string.

However, we can see that this method is not very efficient. We shall see the CYK algorithm which works in $$\mathcal O(n^3)$$.