<!-- # Lecture 21

> `28-02-22` -->

## Satan-Cantor Game

The game goes like this. Satan chooses a random natural number and asks Cantor to guess the number. Cantor gets a chance to guess once on each day. If Cantor guesses the right number, then he can go to heaven. Does Cantor have a strategy that will guarantee him going to heaven? Yes, Cantor can choose numbers in the sequence $$1, 2, 3, \dots$$ and eventually *it is guaranteed* that Cantor chooses the correct number.

Suppose, Satan changes the game by choosing a random integer. Does Cantor have a strategy then? Yes, choose numbers of the form $$0, 1, -1, 2, -2, \dots$$. Now, suppose Satan chooses a pair of integers, then how do we get a strategy? We can order the points based on the distance from the origin in the 2D Cartesian plane (**Cantor’s pairing function**). Similarly, a tuple of $$n$$ integers is also enumerable. 

Can we give a set for Satan such that the elements are not enumerable? What if Satan chooses $$(n_1, \dots, n_k)$$ where $$k$$ is not known to Cantor. Can Cantor win in this case? Yes. *Proof is homework*.

Satan can choose the set of real numbers, and in that scenario Cantor would not be able to win. The key idea here is [**Cantor’s diagonalization argument**](https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~mp/teach/ds/aut19/slides/21.pdf).

Also, look up [Kolmogorov complexity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov_complexity). Enumerability $$\equiv$$ Countability.

## Enumerability in Languages

A language which is finite will be regular, and we can build an FSA for it. How about infinite languages? CFLs can represent a subset of these languages.

If we categorise the infinite languages as languages which are <u>recursively enumerable</u> and <u>uncountable</u>. Can we build models for recursively enumerable languages?

## Turing Machines

Turing wanted to build a machine that could recognize any enumerable language. The inspiration is drawn from the *recursive function theory* developed by Alonzo Church. There are other people who developed **Type-0 grammars** which are similar to CFGs but the left hand side of the rules can consist of a string composed of terminals and non-terminals making it context-dependent. 

Church and Turing came up with a thesis, and they proposed that Church’s theory and Turing’s machine can be used to compute any *effectively computable* function.

> ***Aside.*** Aren’t all languages enumerable with alphabet being a finite set?

“Is $$L(G)$$ empty?” is a decidable problem. However, “Is the complement of $$L(G)$$ empty?” is not decidable! This property was proven by Godel. 

We shall now introduce the notion of Turing machines. Instead of a stack, we have an **input tape** with a *fixed left end*. A string is written in the tape with each letter being in a **cell** of the tape. The machine also involves a control which is essentially a FSM that takes the input from the tape, and performs actions on it. Basically, in PDAs, we could only see the top of the stack, but here we are able to freely traverse over the tape.

## Definitions from set theory

***Definition.*** **Enumerable** of a set refers to the property of being able to define a  one-to-one correspondence from the elements of the set to positive integers.

***Definition.*** In computability theory, a set $$S$$ of natural numbers is called computably enumerable, recursively enumerable, semi-decidable, partially decidable, listable, provable or Turing-recognisable if

- there is an algorithm such that the set of input numbers for which the algorithm halts is exactly $$S$$.
- or equivalently, there is an algorithm that enumerates the members of $$S$$. That means that its output is simply a list of all the members of $$S = \{s_1, s_2, s_3, \dots\}$$ . If $$S$$ is infinite, this algorithm will run forever.

