# Lecture 25

> `14-03-22`

If the TM has to halt when $$w \not \in L$$, then we shall see that this set of TMs will only recognise recursively enumerable languages. For TMs to accept all the enumerable languages, we must allow the TM to not halt for certain inputs.

### TM as an enumerator

Such TMs do not take any input. It continuously writes input on the tape and never halts. The TM prints a sequence that looks like the following $$w_1 \# w_2 \# \dots$$ for each $$w_i \in L$$. The machine halts if $$L$$ is finite, but doesn’t otherwise. $$L$$ is recursively enumerable iff a TM can enumerate the language.

**Semi-Decision Procedure** - Given $$M_1$$ for $$L$$ as an enumerator, construct $$M_2$$ as a recogniser for $$L$$. In $$M_2$$, we can just check if the given input is present in the list of words printed by  $$M_1$$. Now, we have come up with a semi-decision procedure based on an enumerator.

Our goal is to determine if there are any functions that cannot be computed by TMs. Or rather, are there any languages that TM cannot enumerate or recognise. Enumeration and Recognition are equivalent (hint: dovetailing). 

## Recursive Function Theory

Let $$N = \{0, 1, \dots\}$$. Any function we consider will be of the form $$f: N^k \to N$$. How do we define these functions? We start with base cases and recursion. To define these functions, we shall define some basic functions that will be used to define the others.

- **Constant function** - $$C^k_n(x_1, \dots, x_k) = n$$ for all $$x_1, \dots, x_k \in N$$.
- **Successor functions** - $$S(x) = x + 1$$.
- **Projection function** - $$P^k_i(x_1, \dots, x_i, \dots, x_k) = x_i$$ for $$1 \leq i \leq k$$.

We move on to more primitive recursive functions.

- **Composition** - $$f(x_1, \dots, x_k) = h(g_1(x_1, \dots, x_k), \dots, g_m(x_1, \dots, x_k))$$

Primitive recursion is given by 

- **Basecase** - $$f(0, x_1, \dots, x_k) = g(x_1, \dots, x_k)$$
- **Recursion** - $$f(S(y), x_1, \dots) = h(y, f(y, x_1, \dots, x_k), x_1, \dots, x_k)$$

For example, the formal definition of $$+$$ is given by


$$
\begin{align}
+(0, x) &= P^1_1(x) \\
+(S(y), x) &=h(y, +(y, x), x) \\
h(y, +(y, x), x) &= S(+(y, x)) 
\end{align}
$$


There are functions which are not primitive recursive.



