# Lecture 26

> `15-03-22`

We shall see that primitive recursion is not expressive enough, Adding “minimization” to our set of rules will help us define any total function. We shall also see **Equational Programming** that is Turing-complete.

As we have seen earlier, we are using 3 base functions - constant, successor, and projection. Composition is depicted as $$f = h \circ (g_1, \dots, g_m)$$. 

Primitive-Recursion in layman’s terms refers to recursion using for loops. We write the functions as $$f \rho(g, h)$$ where $$g, h$$ are the same functions that are used in the recursive definition. For example, $$add \triangleq \rho(P_1^1, S \circ P_2^3)$$. The recursion must be of this form. The formal definition of $$mult$$ is given by $$mult \triangleq \rho(C_0^1, add \circ (P_1^3, P_2^3))$$.

How do we write functions such as $$div$$. Do we need `if-then-else` notion in our theory? Before we define this, let us try to define $$prev$$ functions. We will define that $$prev(0) = 0$$ for totality of the function. Then, we can define the function as $$prev \triangleq \rho(C_0^0, P_1^2)$$. Using, $$prev$$ we can define $$monus$$ as $$monus(y, x) = x \dot- y  \triangleq \rho(P_1^1, prev \circ P_2^3)$$. 

Now, to introduce the notion of booleans, we define $$isZero \triangleq \rho(C_1^0, C_0^2)$$. We can use this function to utilise booleans. Similarly, $$leq \triangleq \rho(C_1^1, isZero \circ monus \circ (S \circ P_1^3, P_3^3))$$. Using similar logic, we can implement looping and branching.