# Lecture 30

> `24-03-22`

We were discussing the definition of $$quotient$$ in the previous lecture. In terms of minimisation, we can write the definition as


$$
\begin{align}
quotient(x, y) &= \mu(f)(x, y) \\
f(k, x, y) &= y*k > x
\end{align}
$$


## Encoding Turing machines

Let us consider the example of enumerating all the finite subsets of $$N$$. A subset $$(n_1, n_2, \dots, n_k)$$ is represented as $$m = p_1^{n_1} \times \dots \times p_k^{n_k}$$ where $$p_1, \dots, p_k$$ are the first $$k$$ prime numbers. Note that we need to ignore trailing zeros for this.

 Can we enumerate Turing Machines? Let us try to encode a Turing Machine as a bit string. The core idea is that a Turing Machine has a finite set of states. We can encode a transition in the following way - Suppose we have the transition $$\delta(q_3, X_1) = (q_7, X_2, D_0)$$. Then, the bit string corresponding to this is
$$
11\; 000 \;1 \; 0000000 \; 1\; 0 \; 1 \;  00 \; 1 \; 0 \; 11
$$
Here, a $$1$$ just acts as a separator, and every state, tape symbol and direction are encoded in unary format. A substring $$11$$ represents the start of a transition, followed by $$q_3, q_7, X_1, X_2, D_0$$ for the above example. This way, we can list all the transitions of the Turing Machine. All the transitions can be enclosed between a pair of substrings $$(111, 111)$$. Now, we just need to add the set of final states. 

Instead of listing out all the final states, we can convert the Turing Machine to an equivalent TM which has a single finite state.

> ***Homework.*** Prove that the above conversion can be done for any Turing Machine.

Now that we have encoded a TM, how do we enumerate the set of all TMs? We know how to enumerate bit strings based on the value and the length (ignore leading $$0$$‘s for non-ambiguity). We need out to weed out the bit strings that do not represent a valid TM.

What features are present in a bit string that represents a TM? It needs to start with $$111$$, and end with $$111$$. If there is a $$11$$ in between the above substrings, there need to be at least 4 $$1$$‘s in between with appropriate number of $$0$$’s in between. This concludes our discussion on encoding TMs.

## Variants of TM

Let us consider the time of execution with a single computer and $$n$$ computers. Any task will have at most $$n$$ times speedup when done on $$n$$-computers in comparison to a single computer (generally). For example, matrix multiplication can be heavily parallelised. However, tasks such as gcd calculation of $$k$$ numbers is *inherently sequential* and it is not easy to speed it up using parallel computation.

Now, we shall consider variants of TMs and show equivalence of each with the 1-way infinite tape variant.

### 2-way infinite tape

It is easy to see that a 2-way infinite tape can be restricted of the left movement beyond a point to simulate all the 1-way infinite tape machines. 

To prove the other direction, we will consider a multi-track 1-way TM. That is, every cell will now contain 2 elements. The basic idea is that a 2-way machine of the form $$\dots \mid B_1 \mid B_0 \mid A_0 \mid A_1 \mid \dots$$ will be converted to $$ (A_0, C) \mid (A_1, B_0) \mid \dots$$.  

The states in the 2-way machine will be separated based on whether the transition is on the left side of the tape or the right side. Then, based on the side, we will work on the first element in the tuple of each cell or the second element. The formal proof is left to the reader.

### Multi tapes

There are multiple tapes under a single control. Therefore, each transition is represented as $$( X_1, \dots, X_k )\mid ( Y_1, \dots, Y_k) , (D_1, \dots, D_k)$$. One can see that all the logic boils down to the Satan-Cantor puzzle.

Again, one direction of the equivalence is straightforward. The other half involves converting a $$k$$-tuple to a natural number.

### Non-Determinism

The equivalence can be shown in a similar way as that of regular languages.

### k-head machine

We have a single tape which has multiple heads that move independently.

### Offline TM

The input tape never changes. That is, the actions are read-only.



