# Lecture 31

> `28-03-22`

## Universal Turing Machine

The intention is to build a general purpose computer. Recollect that a Turing Machine is represented as $$M = (Q, \Sigma, T, \delta, q, B, F)$$. 

Every Turing Machine has an equivalent TM 

- whose alphabet is $$\{0, 1\}$$ and the set of tape symbols is $$\{0, 1, B\}$$, and
- has a single final state.

 $$L$$ is 

- **recursively enumerable** - there exists a TM (recogniser) that accepts $$L$$ (need not halt on wrong input, think of recogniser built from enumerators).
- **recursive** - there is a TM that accepts $$L$$ <u>which halts on all inputs</u>.

For example, consider the language that accepts a pair of CFGs $$(G_1, G_2)$$ if $$L(G_1) \cap L(G_2) \neq \phi$$. To show that this language is recursively enumerable, we will give a *high level* algorithm in terms of primitive steps that we know can be converted to a TM. We consider the following algorithm.

```
- Enumerate L(G_1) // enumerate w, check G_1 =>* w (CYK)
- For each w in L(G_1) check if G_2 =>* w
```

Now, if we generate a word and check for the word in the other grammar alternately, then the algorithm will halt if the input is acceptable. However, it is not guaranteed to halt in case of unacceptable input for this algorithm. Does that mean the language is recursively enumerable?

We need to show that we can’t construct an algorithm that halts in case of an unacceptable input. Then, we can conclusively state that the language is recursively enumerable. 

In conclusion, there are language that are recursively enumerable, and languages that are not recursively enumerable. The set of recursive languages are a strict subset of the set of recursively enumerable languages.

### Non-recursive language

We know that we can enumerate all TMs and all $$w \in \Sigma^*$$. Then, we draw a 2D infinite bit matrix A where $$A_{ij}$$ tells whether $$w_i \in M_j$$. Now, we use the Cantor’s diagonalization argument to conclude that $$L_d = \{i \mid A_{ii} = 0\}$$ is not recursively enumerable. **Genius proof** based off Barber’s paradox.

If $$L$$ is not recursively enumerable, then $$\bar L$$ is also not recursively enumerable. That is, show that if TM accepts $$L$$, then it must also accept $$\bar L$$. 

One might ponder on how we construct the table $$A$$ when some TM may not halt for a few inputs. The important distinction is that, we are “defining” this table conceptually and not “computing” it. The concept of dovetailing also comes to use here.

### Recursively enumerable but not Recursive

The language of the **Universal Turing Machine** is the required example. We formally define this language as $$L_u = \{\lang M, w\rang \mid\ M \text{ halts on } w\}$$. 

Equivalently, we are trying to write a Python script that takes another Python script as input along with some arguments. This script should halt when the input python script halts on the input argument, and need not halt otherwise. Basically, we are trying to build a simulator TM. 