# Lecture 34

> `04-04-22`

## Undecidability

A language $$L \subseteq \Sigma^*$$ is **recursive** if there is a Turing Machine $$M$$ that halts in an accept state if $$w \in L$$ and in a reject state if $$w \not\in L$$. It *<u>need</u>* not halt in reject states for **recursively enumerable** languages. The algorithms similar to the latter TMs are **semi-decidable**.

We were looking for languages that are not recursively enumerable $$L_d$$ and languages that are recursively enumerable but not recursive $$L_u$$. For the latter set, we had seen the universal TM. We also have the language of “polynomials that have integer roots”. How do we show that this is recursively enumerable? The key idea lies in encoding polynomials as a number. The motivation for this language comes from **Hilbert’s 10th Problem**.

Another example for an undecidable problem is the **Halting Problem**. 

Let us continue the discussion on $$L_u$$ and $$L_d$$ from the last lecture. We had constructed a matrix $$A$$ and showed using the diagonalization argument that there are languages that are not recursively enumerable. However, we did not address two issues

- There are multiple TMs that accept the same language - It does not matter.
- How do we fill the table? - Computation vs Definition.

Also, all the languages defined by each row $$A_i$$ in the matrix form the set of recursively enumerable languages. 

We had defined $$L_u$$ as $$\{(M_i, w_j) \mid M_i \text{ accepts } w_j \}$$. We will show that this language is recursively enumerable by constructing a Turing Machine $$M$$ that accepts this language. The input tape will initially have the encoding of $$M_i$$ followed by the encoding of $$w_j$$. Now, we use two more tapes

- One for copying $$w_j$$
- Another tape for keeping track of the state in $$M$$, starting with state 0.

Now, we give the higher level logic of $$M$$.

- Validate $$M_i$$. This can be done using a TM.
- Run $$M_i$$ step-by-step. Pick the top state from the 3rd tape, find the corresponding move from the first tape, and update the 2nd and 3rd tapes. 

The last two tapes help simulate any input TM. In conclusion, we have constructed a universal TM. Therefore, the TM paradigm is powerful enough to perform **self-introspection**.

Note that we have still not shown $$L_u$$ is not recursive. We will use the properly of $$L_d$$ not being recursively enumerable to show this.
