# Lecture 36

> `07-04-22`

**Note.** Don't get confused into thinking there are three (disjoint) kinds of sets: decidable, semi-decidable, and undecidable. There are two kinds: decidable and undecidable. Semi-decidable falls under undecidable.

## NP-Completeness

### Decision Problems

These are a class of problems that deal with problem instances like Fermat’s last theorem - $$\forall n > 2\exists a, b, c, a^n + b^n = c^n$$? We also have the law of excluded middle in decision problems - The answer is either ‘yes’ or ‘no’.

Optimisation problems can be converted to a decision problem.

### Decidable Problems

We solve these problems by building a brute-force TM - **generate and test method**. For example, consider the problem of finding a vertex cover in a graph of size $$k$$. Now, the TM will enumerate all subsets of size $$k$$ and check each one for vertex cover conditions.

We come up with “algorithms” for these problems and check their efficiency. Apart from time and space complexity, we also consider **descriptive (Kolmogorov) complexity**. It refers to the program size. In our case, it refers to the size of the TM.

### Complexity Classes

Given two problems, which problem is “more difficult”? The difficulty criterion we consider is time. We define two classes of problems $$P$$ and $$NP$$.

- **P** is the class of (decision) problems that can be solved in “polynomial time” by a deterministic Turing Machine $$M$$. 
- **PSPACE** refers to the class of problems that use polynomial number of cells in the tape. 
- **NP** is the class of (decision) problems that can be solved in **polynomial time** by <u>non-deterministic TM</u>. This is equivalent to guessing a solution in polynomial time followed by checking using a deterministic TM in polynomial time. The claim is that this is same as a non-deterministic TM. We shall use this technique to show that problems are in NP. That is, we’ll show that we can guess in P-time and verify in P-time.

For example, let us try to show vertex cover problem is in $$NP$$. Aside - A polynomial algorithm was developed in the 1980s for the problem “Is $$n$$ a prime number” in IITK (Manindra Agarwal).

### More difficult problem

Given $$L_1$$ and $$L_2$$, which one is more difficult? We use reduction to answer this question. 


$$
L_1 \leq_{P} L_2
$$


If $$L_1$$ can be converted to an instance of $$L_2$$ in polynomial time, then we have the above defined relation. That is, $$L_2$$ is at least as difficult as $$L_1$$.

### Completeness

We try to determine the most difficult problem amongst all the problems. To start off, we define that $$L_{sat}$$ belongs to NP-complete set. This problem refers to the satisfiability of propositional logic expressions.

Every problem in $$NP$$ can be reduced to $$L_{sat}$$. In some sense, $$L_{sat}$$ is the most difficult problem. But how did we come to this conclusion without knowing all the problems in $$NP$$? We can show that <u>any non-deterministic TM can be reduced to</u> $$L_{sat}$$.

