# Lecture 37

> `11-04-22`

Let us continue the topic of NP-completeness. 

We define hard problems as anything not in $$P$$. There are problems that are more difficult than the ones in $$NP$$!

We classify decidable problems as the set of recursive languages. These problems can be further classified as

- Deterministic TM takes only polynomial number of steps in terms of the input size to halt.
- A non-deterministic TM takes polynomial number of steps. 

- A non-deterministic TM needs $$\Omega (2^n)$$ number of steps. 

### SAT Problem $$P_{sat}$$

Given a well formed formula $$F$$, is $$F$$ satisfiable? A well formed formula is a formula that is formed via the base case (propositional variables) and inductive rules (using connectors like negation, ‘and’ and ‘or’).

This problem can be solved via brute force but that is exponential. So we now ask the following questions

- Is $$P_{sat} \in P$$?
- Is $$P_{sat} \in NP$$?

We’ll answer the second question first. It is easy to construct a non-deterministic TM that solves the problem in polynomial steps. We can generate a random guess (bit string) and verify (check satisfiability) in polynomial steps. This procedure is the way to show that any problem is in $$NP$$.

### Comparison of Problems

Let us revisit the topic of $$\leq_{P}$$. $$P_{sat} \leq_{P} 3\text{-}SAT$$, and $$3\text{-}SAT \leq_P VC$$ where $$VC$$ is the vertex cover problem. 

To do perform the latter reduction, we construct nodes for $$p$$ and $$\neg p$$ for each propositional variable in the clause. Then, we construct cliques out of each disjunction in the CNF. Finally, we connect each $$p$$ with $$\neg p$$. Now, if we can find a vertex cover of this graph with size $$2k$$, we get the satisfiability of the 3-CNF clause with $$k$$ disjunctive clauses. 

- If $$F$$ has a satisfying assignment, take out exactly one literal with value $$1$$ out of each disjunctive clause and construct a VC out of the remaining literals. It can be shown that the vertex cover will have size $$2k$$.
- If there is a vertex cover,  then we can drop  at most 1 node from each disjunctive clause. Also, as the size if $$2k$$ we can drop exactly 1 node from each clause. Assign these dropped nodes with a value of $$1$$. Now, since we have a true value in each clause, the assignment satisfies the expression.

### NP-Completeness

As we mentioned before, we consider $$P_{sat}$$ or $$3\text{-}SAT$$ as the hardest problem. That is, for every $$Q \in NP$$, $$Np \leq_P P_{sat}$$. 

We show this by reducing non-deterministic Turing Machines to $$P_{sat}$$. To prove that a problem is NP-complete, we show

- That the problem lies in $$NP$$. This step is very important as there are problems that are more difficult than $$NP$$.
- Convert the 3-SAT problem (or any other known NP-complete problem) to an instance of the given problem.

We list out some problems in NP-complete set.

- 3-SAT
- Vertex Cover
- Clique in a graph
- $$k$$-coloring
- Min-cut and Max-flow
- Travelling Salesman Problem
- Hamiltonian Cycle in a graph
- Partitioning of a set of numbers such that the partitions have the same sum
- Knapsack problem

The good news about $$NP$$-complete problems is that there are many heuristics and approximations such as LAs Vegas and Monte Carlo that work well for most of the above problems.

---

END OF COURSE

---

