# Lecture 1

*Numerical Analysis* is the study of various methods

- to solve
  - differential equations,
  - systems of linear equations,
  - $$f(x) = \alpha$$.
- to approximate functions and
- to study the corresponding errors.

**Example.** $$e = \lim_{n \to \inf} (1 + 1/n)^n)$$. How do we approximate $$e$$ to an arbitrary accuracy? Since, the $$exp$$ function is infinitely many times differentiable, we can approximate the function using Taylor's theorem to any degree of precision we want.

<div style='text-align: center;'>

$$
\text{Taylor's theorem} \\
f(x) = f(a) + f'(a)(x - a) + \cdots + \\
			\frac{f^{(k)}(a)}{k!}(x - a)^k + \frac{f^{(k + 1)}(c)}{k!}(x - a)^{k + 1}
$$
</div>Using this, we get

<div style='text-align: center;'>


$$
e = 1 + \frac{1}{1!} + \frac{1}{2!} + \cdots + \\
\frac{1}{n!} + \frac{e^c}{(n + 1)!}
$$
</div>where $$c$$ is some real number between 0 and 1. Here, the error term at the $$n$$-th approximation is the term $$e^c/(n + 1)!$$. We know that $$e^c$$ is less than 3 so we can compute $$n$$ where the error term is less than the prescribed error!

For example, suppose we want the error to be less than $$10^{-10}$$, then we use $$e^c/(n + 1)! < 10^{-10}$$.

**Note.** The last term is not the error in our approximation! We are choosing $$e^c  = 3$$ for no particular reason. It can be any value greater than the true value of $$e^c$$. For instance, we can take $$e^c = 1000$$ too. If we want our calculated value $$e$$ value to be precise till the 10th decimal, then we ensure that $$1000/(n + 1)! < 10^{-10}$$ by tuning $$n$$ appropriately.  

## Aspects of numerical analysis

- The theory behind the calculation, and
- The computation.

Some calculators have a loss of information due to limits in precision. This is due to the round-off error. We need to be able to detect and deal with such cases.

