# Lecture 2

## Finite digit arithmetic

When we do arithmetic, we allow for infinitely many digits. However, in the computational world, each representable number has only a fixed and finite number of digits. In most cases, the machine arithmetic is satisfactory, but at times problems arise because of this discrepancy. The error that is produced due to this issue is called the **round-off** error. 

A 64-bit representation is used for a real number. The first bit is a **sign indicator**, denoted by *s*. This is followed by an 11-bit exponent, *c*, called the **characteristic**, and a 52-bit binary fraction, *f*, called the **mantissa**. To ensure that numbers with small magnitude are equally representable, 1023 is subtracted from the characteristic, so the range of the exponent is actually from -1023 to 1024.

Thus, the system gives a floating-point number of the form

<div style='text-align:center;'>

$$
(-1)^s\cdot2^{c - 1023}\cdot(1 + f)
$$
</div>Since 52 binary digits correspond to between 16 and 17 decimal digits, we can assume that a number represented in this system is accurate till the 16th decimal.

> Can't a single number be represented in many ways through this representation? Think about 1 for instance.

The smallest positive number that can be represented is with $$s = 0, c = 1, f = 0$$, so it is

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
2^{-1022}\cdot(1 + 0) \approx 0.22251 \times 10^{-307}
$$
</div>Numbers occurring in calculations that have a magnitude less than this number result in **underflow** and are generally set to 0.

The largest positive number is

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
2^{1023}\cdot (2 - 2^{-52})
$$
</div>Numbers above this would result in an **overflow**.

## Floating-point representation

We will use numbers of the form

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
\pm 0.d_1d_2\dots d_kd_{k + 1} \times 10^n
$$
</div>with $$1 \leq d_1 \leq 9$$. There are two ways to get the floating-point representations $$fl(p)$$ of a positive number $$p$$

- **Chopping.** We simply chop off the $$d_{k + 1}, d_{k + 2}, \dots$$ and write $$0.d_1d_2\dots d_k \times 10^n$$
- **Rounding.** We add $$ 5 \times 10^{n - (k + 1)}$$ to the number and then chop the result to obtain $$0.\delta_1\delta_2\dots \delta_k \times 10^n$$

## Errors

This approximate way of writing numbers is bound to create errors. If $$p$$ is a real number and if $$p^*$$ is its approximation then the **absolute error** is $$\|p - p ^*\|$$ while the **relative error** is $$\|p - p ^*\|/p$$ whenever $$p \neq 0$$. Relative error is more meaningful as it takes into account the size of the number $$p$$.

**Note.** Relative error can be negative as we take the value of $$p$$ in the denominator!

## Significant digits

We say that the number $$p^*$$ approximates $$p$$ to $$t$$ significant digits if $$t$$ is the largest non-negative integer for which

<div style='text-align:center;'>


$$
\frac{\|p - p^*\|}{p} < 5 \times 10^{-t}
$$

</div>

## Finite Digit Arithmetic

The arithmetic in machines in defined by the following -

<div style='text-align:center;'> 


$$
x \oplus y := fl(fl(x) + fl(y))
$$
</div>
