# Lecture 3

## Major sources of errors

One of the major sources of errors is cancellation of two nearly equal numbers. Suppose we have

<div style='text-align:center'>


$$
fl(x) = 0.d_1d_2\dots d_p\alpha_{p + 1}\dots\alpha_k \times 10^n \\
fl(y) = 0.d_1d_2\dots d_p\beta_{p + 1}\dots\beta_k \times 10^n \\
fl(fl(x) - fl(y)) = 0.\gamma_{p + 1}\dots\gamma_k \times 10^{n - p}
$$
</div>In the above set of equations, the difference $$x \ominus y$$ has $$k - p$$ digits of significance compared to the $$k$$ digits of significance of $$x$$ and $$y$$. The number of significant digits have reduced which leads to errors in further calculations.

Another way the errors creep in is when we divide by number of small magnitude or multiply by numbers of large magnitude. This is because the error gets multiplied by a factor which increases its absolute value.

 Consider the expression $$-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}/2a$$. By default, we consider positive square roots. Here, if $$b^2$$ is large compared to $$4ac$$ then the machine is likely to treat $$4ac$$ as zero. How do we get around this error? **Rationalization**

<div style='text-align:center'>


$$
\frac{-b + \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a} \times \frac{-b - \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{-b - \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}} = \frac{-2c}{b + \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}
$$
</div>

​	 Notice what happened here. Previously, the roots would have become zero because $$4ac$$ could have been approximated as zero. However, this does not happen after rationalization! Also, do note that this won’t work when $$b<0$$ as we are considering positive square roots. If $$b<0$$, we can use the formula without rationalization. Think about the other root using such cases. Thus, the cancellation error can come in two major ways:

- when we cancel two nearly equal numbers, and
- when we subtract a small number from a big number

### Errors propagate

Once an error is introduced in a calculation, any further operation is likely to contain the same or a higher error. 

## Can we avoid errors?

Errors are inevitable in finite arithmetic. There are some measures that we can take to try to avoid errors, or minimize them. For example, a general degree 3 polynomial can be written as a nested polynomial.

<div style='text-align:center'>


$$
ax^3 + bx^2 + cx + d - x(x(ax + b) + c) + d
$$
Computations done using this form will typically have a smaller error as the number of operations has reduced (from 5 to 3). 

Now, we are done with the first theme of our course - ***Machine arithmetic***. 
