# Lecture 5

## Fixed points and roots

A *fixed point* of $$f : [a,b] \to \mathbb R$$ is $$p \in [a,b]$$ such that $$f(p) = p$$. Finding a fixed point of the function $$f$$ is equivalent to finding the root of the function $$g(x) = f(x) - x$$. We can create many such functions which give fixed points of $$f$$ on solving for the roots of the function.

***Theorem.*** *Fixed Point Theorem*. If $$f: [a,b] \to [a,b]$$ is continuous then $$f$$ has a fixed point. If, in addition, $$f’(x)$$ exists on $$(a, b)$$ and $$\vert f’(x)\vert \leq k < 1$$ for all $$x \in (a, b)$$ then $$f$$ has a unique fixed point in $$[a, b]$$.

The hypothesis is sufficient but not necessary!

### Fixed point iteration

We start with a continuous $$f: [a,b] \to [a,b]$$. Take any initial approximation $$p_0 \in [a,b]$$ and generate a sequence $$p_n = f(p_{n - 1})$$. If the sequence $$\{p_n\}$$ converges to $$p \in [a, b]$$ then

<div style='text-align:center'>

$$
\begin{align}
f(p) &= f(\lim_n p_n) \\
 &= \lim_n (p_n) = \lim_n p_{n + 1}\\  &= p
\end{align}
$$



</div> This method is called the *fixed point iteration method*. It’s convergence is not guaranteed.

For instance, consider the roots of the equation $$x^3 + 4x^2 - 10 = 0$$. The following functions can be used to find the roots using the fixed points. 

<div style='text-align:center'>

$$
\begin{align}
x &= g_1(x) = x - (x^3 + 4x^2 - 10)\\
x &= g_2(x) = (\frac{10}{x} - 4x)^{1/2} \\
x &= g_3(x) = \frac{1}{2}(10 - x^3)^{1/2}
\end{align}
$$

</div> The results using different $$g$$’s in the Fixed Point Iteration method are surprising. The first two functions diverge, and the last one converges. This problem is because the hypothesis of the FPT does not hold in the first two functions. While the derivative $$g’(x)$$ fails to satisfy in the FPT, a closer look tells us that it is enough to work on the interval $$[1, 1.5]$$ where the function $$g_3$$ is strictly decreasing.

So now we have the question - How can we find a fixed point problem that produces a sequence that reliably and rapidly converges to a solution to a given root-finding problem?

