# Lecture 6

## Newton-Raphson method

This is a particular fixed point iteration method. Assume that $$f: [a, b] \to \mathbb R$$ is twice differentiable. Let $$p \in [a, b]$$ be a solution of the equation $$f(x) = 0$$. If $$p_0$$ is another point in $$[a, b]$$ then Taylor’s theorem gives 

<div style=‘text-align:center’>


$$
\begin{align}
0 &= f(p) \\
&= f(p_0) + (p - p_0)f'(p_0) + \frac{(p - p_0)^2}{2}f''(\xi)
\end{align}
$$

</div>for some $$ \xi$$ between $$p$$ and $$p_0$$. We assume that $$\vert p - p_0 \vert$$ is very small. Therefore, $$0 \approx f(p_0) + (p - p_0)f’(p_0)$$. This sets the stage for the Newton-Raphson method, which starts with an initial approximation $$p_0$$ and generate the sequence $$\{p_n\}$$ by 

<div style=‘text-align:center’>


$$
p_n = p_{n - 1} - \frac{f(p_{n - 1})}{f'(p_{n - 1})}
$$

</div> What is the geometric interpretation of this method? It approximates successive tangents. The Newton-Raphson method is evidently better than the fixed point iteration method. However, it is important to note that $$\vert p - p_0 \vert$$ is need to be small so the third term in the Taylor’s polynomial can be dropped.

***Theorem.*** Let $$f: [a, b] \to \mathbb R$$ be twice differentiable. If $$p \in (a, b)$$ is such that $$f(p) = 0$$ and $$f’(p) \neq 0$$, then there exists a $$\delta > 0$$ such that for any $$p_0 \in [p - \delta, p + \delta]$$, the Newton-Raphson method generates a sequence $$\{p_n\}$$ converging to $$p$$.

This theorem is seldom applied in practice, as it does not tell us how to determine the constant $$\delta$$. In a practical application, an initial approximation is selected and successive approximations are generated by the method. These will generally either converge quickly to the root, or it will be clear that convergence is unlikely.

