# Lecture 7

### Problems with the Newton-Raphson method

We have


$$
p_n = p_{n - 1} - \frac{f(p_{n - 1})}{f'(p_{n - 1})}
$$
One major problem with this is that we need to compute the value of $$f’$$ at each step. Typically, $$f'$$ is far more difficult to compute and needs more arithmetic operations to calculate than $$f$$. 

## Secant method

This method is a slight variation to NR to circumvent the above problem. By definition,


$$
f'(a) = \lim_{x \to a} \frac{f(a) - f(x)}{a - x}
$$
If we assume that $$p_{n - 2}$$ is reasonable close to $$p_{n - 1}$$ then


$$
f'(p_{n - 1}) \approx \frac{f(p_{n - 1}) - f(p_{n - 2})}{p_{n - 1} - p_{n - 2}}
$$
This adjustment is called as the *secant method*. The geometric interpretation is that we use successive secants instead of tangents. Note that we can use the values of $$f(p_{n - 2})$$ from the previous calculations to prevent redundant steps. We need two initial guesses in this method.

Secant method is efficient in comparison to Newton-Raphson as it requires only a single calculation in each iteration whereas NR requires 2 calculations in each step.

## The method of false position

The NR or the Secant method may give successive approximations which are on one side of the root. That is $$f(p_{n - 1}) \cdot f(p_n)$$ need not be negative. We can modify this by taking the pair of approximations which are on both sides of the root. This gives the ***regula falso method*** or the *method of false position*.

We choose initial approximations $$p_0$$ and $$p_1$$ with $$f(p_0)\cdot f(p_1) < 0$$. We then use Secant method for successive updates. If in any iteration, we have $$f(p_{n - 1})\cdot f(p_n) > 0$$, then we replace $$p_{n - 1}$$ by $$p_{n - 2}$$.

The added requirement of the regula falsi method results in more calculations than the Secant method.

## Comparison of all the root finding methods

- The bisection method guarantees a sequence converging to the root but it is a slow method.
- The other methods are sure to work, once the sequence is convergent. The convergence typically depends on the initial approximations being very close to the root.
- Therefore, in general, bisection method is used to get the initial guess, and then NR or the Secant method is used to get the exact root.

