# Lecture 10

We begin the third theme of our course - *Interpolation*

Polynomials are very well studied functions. They have the form $$P(x) = a_nx^n + \cdots + a_1x + a_0$$. Given any continuous function $$f: [a, b] \to \mathbb R$$, there exists a polynomial that is as close to the given function as desired. In other words, we can construct a polynomial which exactly matches the function in a finite interval. This is known as ***Weierstrass approximation theorem***. Another reason to prefer polynomials is that the derivatives of polynomials are also polynomials.

## Taylor polynomials

We can consider the polynomials formed by Taylor’s theorem. However, these polynomials approximate the function only at a single point. The advantage of using these polynomials is that the error between the function and the polynomial can be determined accurately.   For ordinary computational purposes it is more efficient to use methods that include information at various points. 

## Lagrange interpolating polynomials

Let $$f$$ be a function with $$f(x_0) = y_0$$. Is there a polynomial $$P(x)$$ with $$P(x_0) = y_0$$.  

The simplest case is $$P(x) = y_0$$. If we have two points $$x_0$$ and $$x_1$$, then we can have $$P(x) = a_1x + a_0$$ with $$a_0, a_1$$ appropriately calculated. We can generalize this for more number of points.

Let $$x_0, x_1, \dots, x_n$$ be distinct $$(n + 1)$$-points and let $$f$$ be a function with $$f(x_i) = y_i, \forall i \in [n]$$. We want to find a polynomial $$P$$ that equals $$f$$ at these points. To do this, we first solve $$n + 1$$ special problems, where $$y_i = \delta_{i, n + 1}$$. We find polynomials $$L_{n, i}$$ with


$$
L_{n, i}(x_j) = \delta_{i, j} = \cases{0 & i $\neq$ j \\ 1 & i = j}
$$


For a fixed $$i$$, $$L_{n, i}(x_j) = 0$$ for $$j \neq i$$. So $$(x - x_j)$$ divides $$L_{n, i}(x)$$ for each $$j \neq i$$. Since the points $$x_i$$ are all distinct, we have that the product of all such $$(x - x_j)$$‘s divides $$L_{n, i}(x)$$. We define $$L_{n, i}(x)$$ as


$$
L_{n, i}(x) = \frac{(x - x_0)\dots(x - x_{i - 1})(x - x_{i + 1})\dots (x - x_n)}{(x_i - x_0)\dots(x_i - x_{i - 1})(x_i - x_{i + 1})\dots(x_i - x_n)}
$$


then $$L_{n, i}(x_j) = \delta_{i, j}$$. Now, $$P$$ can be constructed as


$$
P(x) = y_0L_{n, 0}(x) + \dots + y_nL_{n, n}(x)
$$


The validity of this polynomial can be checked easily.