# Lecture 13

 Before we move on to the general formula, let us take the previous calculations one step further. Suppose we had to calculate the cubic polynomial in terms of the quadratic polynomials. The tedious way to do this is to expand each formula and substitute. We also have an easy way to do this. Recall the ‘unique polynomial’ theorem from last week. If we guess the formula of the cubic polynomial using induction, then all we have to do is check the value of the function at the 4 points which define it. If the value matches, then it is the polynomial we are looking for due to uniqueness.

## Neville’s formula

Let $$f$$ be defined on $$\{x_0, x_1, \dots, x_n\}$$. Choose two distinct nodes $$x_i$$ and $$x_j$$. Let $$Q_i$$ be the polynomial interpolating $$f$$ on all nodes except $$x_i$$, and let $$Q_j$$ be the one interpolating $$f$$ on all nodes except $$x_j$$. If $$P$$ denotes the polynomial interpolating $$f$$ on all notes then


$$
P(x) = \frac{(x - x_j)Q_j(x) - (x - x_i)Q_i(x)}{x_i - x_j}
$$


In Neville’s formula we can get the interpolating for higher degree from any two polynomials for two subsets of nodes which are obtained by removing a single node. Through such cumulative calculations, we can calculate the interpolating polynomials up to a certain degree until we get the required accuracy. Neville’s method gives the values of the interpolating polynomials at a specific point, without having to compute the polynomials themselves.

## Divided Differences

Given the function $$f$$ on distinct $$(n + 1)$$ nodes, there is a unique polynomial $$P_n$$ interpolating $$f$$ on these nodes. We define $$f[x_0, \dots, x_n]$$ to be the coefficient of $$x^n$$ in $$P_n$$. Now, it follows readily that the value of $$f[x_0, \dots, x_n]$$ does not depend on the ordering of the nodes $$x_i$$. Now, we shall try to get a recurrence formula for the coefficients $$f[x_0, \dots, x_n]$$.

Let $$P_{n - 1}$$ and $$Q_{n - 1}$$ be the polynomials interpolating $$f$$ on the nodes $$x_0, \dots, x_{n - 1}$$ and $$x_1, \dots, x_n$$ respectively. We can get $$P_n$$ from these two polynomials using Neville’s method. The coefficient of $$x^n$$ in $$P_n$$ is then


$$
\frac{\text{coefficient of } x^{n - 1} \text{ in } Q_{n - 1} - \text{coefficient of } x^{n - 1} \text{ in } P_{n - 1}}{x_n - x_0} \\
= \frac{f[x_1, \dots, x_n] - f[x_0, \dots, x_{n - 1}]}{x_n - x_0}
$$


Also note that for $$i < n, P_n(x_i) = P_{n - 1}(x_i)$$. That is, $$P_n - P_{n - 1} = \alpha(x - x_0)\dots (x - x_{n - 1})$$ where $$\alpha$$ is a real number. Hence, $$f[x_0, \dots, x_n] = \alpha$$ and we have


$$
P_n = P_{n - 1} + (x - x_0)\dots (x - x_{n - 1})f[x_0, \dots, x_n]
$$


This formula is known as Newton’s finite differences formula.