# Lecture 6

> `29-01-22`

A parser identifies the relationship between tokens.

## Constructing DFAs for Multiple Patterns

- Firstly, join multiple DFAs/NFAs using $$\epsilon$$ transitions.
- This creates an NFA. This NFA can be converted to a DFA by subset construction. Each state in the resulting DFA is a set of “similar” states of the NFA. The start state of the DFA is a union of all original start states (of multiple patterns). The subsequent states are identified by finding out the sets of states of the NFA for each possible input symbol.

## Constructing NFA for a Regular Expression

Consider a regular expression $$R$$.

1. If $$R$$ is a letter in the alphabet $$\Sigma$$, create a two state NFA that accepts the letter.
2. If $$R$$ is $$R_1.R_2$$, create an NFA by joining the two NFAs $$N_1$$ and $$N_2$$ by adding an epsilon transition from every final state of $$N_1$$ to the start state of $$N_2$$.
3. If $$R$$ is $$R_1\vert R_2$$, create an NFA by creating a new start state $$s_0$$ and a new final state $$s_f$$. Add an epsilon transition from $$s_0$$ to the start state of $$R_1$$ and similarly for $$R_2$$. Also, add an epsilon transition from every final state of $$N_1$$ to $$s_f$$ and similarly for $$N_2$$.
4. If $$R$$ is $$R_1^*$$, create an NFA by adding an epsilon transition from every final state of $$R_1$$ to the start state of $$R_1$$.

> - In the 2nd rule, all the final states in $$N_1$$ must be made into normal states?
> - In the 4th rule, $$R$$ must accept $$S = \epsilon$$ too.
> - Where is the rule for $$R = (R_1)$$.

Recall the following rules

- *First matching rule preferred*. For example, if we write the rule $$L(L|D)^*$$ - ID before $$int$$ - INT, then the lexeme $$int$$ will be taken as ID token and not INT token.
- *Longest match preferred.* For example, consider identifiers and int and the lexeme $$integer$$. Then the lexeme will be treated as a single identifier token, and not an INT followed by ID.

These rules are implicitly a part of DFAs in a way. The construction ensures the longest match is preferred. The accepted pattern is chosen from the possible patterns based on the first matching rule. <u>To ensure our grammar works as intended, special patterns must be written before general patterns.</u>

## Representing DFAs using Four Arrays

A parsing table is also represented in a similar way. This is a general efficient representation for sparse data. The representation is explained through an example. Consider the following DFA

|      | a    | b    | c    |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 0    | 1    | 0    | 3    |
| 1    | 1    | 2    | 3    |
| 2    | 1    | 3    | 3    |
| 3    | 1    | 0    | 3    |

with $$2$$ being the final state. We use the following character codes

| Char | Code |
| ---- | ---- |
| a    | 0    |
| b    | 1    |
| c    | 2    |

Notice that states 0 and 3 have identical transitions. States 1 and 2 differ only on the ‘b’ transition. We shall use these similarities to exploit compact representation. The four arrays we consider are **default**, **base**, **next** and **check**. We follow the given steps.

1. We choose to fill the entries for state 0 first. 
2. The ‘check’ array contains 0 to confirm that the corresponding entries in the ‘next’ array are for state 0. ‘Base’ is the location from which the transitions of state are stored in the ‘next’ array.
3. For state 1, we reuse the transition on a and c from state 0 but we need to enter transition on b explicitly. We do this using the next free entry in the next array and back calculating the base of state 1.
4. State 2 is filled in the same way.
5. State 3 is identical to state 0. We keep its base same as that of state 0.

The transition function in pseudocode is given by

```c
int nextState(state, char)
{
	if (Check[Base[state] + char] == state)
        return Next[Base[state] + char];
    else
    	return nextState(Default[state], char);
}
```

> How do we prevent clashes in the next array?

We can further compress the tables using **equivalence class** reduction. In the above code, instead of `char`, we can have `class`. So for example, instead of defining transitions separately for 26 characters, we can define a single transition for all the letters. Further optimization can be done via *meta-equivalence classes*.

