# Lecture 8

### Parse Trees

If a non-terminal $$A$$ is replaced using a production $$A \to \alpha$$ in a left-sentential form, then $$A$$ is also replaced by the same rule in a right-sentential form. The previous statement is only true when there is no ambiguity in derivations. The commonality of the two derivations is expressed as a *parse tree*.

A *parse tree* is a pictorial form of depicting a derivation. The root of the tree is labeled with $$S$$, and each leaf node is labeled b a token on by $$\epsilon$$. An internal node of the tree is labeled by a non-terminal. If an internal node has $$A$$ as its label and the children of this node from left to right are labeled with $$X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n$$, then there must be a production $$A \to X_1X_2\dots X_n$$ where $$X_i$$ is a grammar symbol.

### Ambiguous Grammars

Consider the grammar


$$
E \to E + E \ \vert \ E*E \ \vert \ id
$$


and the sentence `id + id * id`. We can have more than one leftmost derivation for this sentence.


$$
\begin{align}
E &\implies E + E \\
&\implies id + E \\
&\implies id + E * E \\
&\implies id + id * id
\end{align}
$$


The other leftmost derivation is -


$$
\begin{align}
E &\implies E * E \\
&\implies E + E * E \\
&\implies id + E * E \\
&\implies id + id * id
\end{align}
$$


A grammar is **ambiguous**, if there is a sentence for which there are 

- more than one parse trees, or equivalently
- more than one leftmost/right most derivations.

We can disambiguate the grammar while parsing (easier choice) or the grammar itself.

**Grammar rewriting**

Ambiguities can be eradicated via 

- Precedence
- Associativity

### Parsing Strategies

We have top-down and bottom-up parsing techniques. We shall only see bottom-up parsing in this course. 

Consider the grammar

```
D -> var list : type;
tpye -> integer | float;
list -> list, id | id
```

The bottom-up parse and the sentential forms produced for the string `var id, id : integer ;` is -

```
var id, id : integer ;
var list, id : integer ;
var list : integer ;
var list : type ;
D
```

The sentential forms happen to be a right most derivation reverse order. The basic steps of a bottom-up parser are

- to identify a *substring* within a rightmost sentential form which matches the rhs of a rules
- when this substring is replaced by the lhs of the matching rule, it must produce the previous rm-sentential form.

Such a substring is called **handle**.

**Handle** - A handle of a right sentential form $$\gamma$$, is

- a production rules $$A \to \beta$$, and
- an occurrence of substring $$\beta$$ in $$\gamma$$.

Bottom-up parsing is an LR parsing as it amounts to reading the input from left to right, and placing the right most derivation in reverse.

**Note.** Only terminal symbols can appear to the right of a handle in a right most sentential form.

## Syntax Analysis

We shall assume that we know how to detect handles in a string, and proceed with parsing algorithms.

### Shift Reduce Parsing

Basic actions of the shift-reduce parser are - 

- **Shift** - Moving a single token form the input buffer onto the stack till a handle appears on the stack
- **Reduce** - When a handle appears on the stack, it is popped and replaced by the lhs of the production rule
- **Accept** - When the stack 
- **Error** - 