# Lecture 16

> `11-03-22`

Previously, we had calculated the cumulative offset for a structure access in the IR. As in, we computed the final offsets at compile time and consequently used `F.offset` attribute instead of the `F.code` attribute. Alternately, we did not do ‘compile time offset calculation’ for the pointer IR code. 

Let us now continue the discussion on inherited and synthesised attributes. A synthesised attribute is an attribute derived for a non-terminal on the lhs of a production from the non-terminals on the rhs of the same production. Inherited attributes are derived for non-terminals on the rhs of a production from the non-terminal on the rhs or other non-terminals on the rhs. So, why do we require inherited attributes?

For example, consider type analysis 

```c
Decl -> Type VarList {$2 -> type = $1 -> name}
Type -> int | float {$$ -> name = $2;}
VarList -> VarList, id {$1 -> type = $$ -> type; $3 -> type = $$ -> type;}
Varlist -> id {$1 -> type = $$ -> type;}
```

Here, the attribute `type` is inherited.

However, how do we allow flow of attributes concurrently with parsing? Clearly, there would be non-terminals that are not generated at a given step during parsing, and inherited attributes cannot be computed if they depend on a symbol not yet seen. All these problems can be avoided by  no allowing inherited attributes to be derived from the symbols to the right of the current symbol. So once the left non-terminals are derived, we can derive the attribute for the current non-terminal.

In summary, given a production $$X \to Y_1, \dots, Y_k$$

- $$Y_i.a$$ is computed only from the attributes of $$X$$ or $$Y_j$$, $$j < i$$.
- $$X.a$$ would have been computed from the grammar symbols that have already been seen (i.e, in some production of the form $$Z \to \alpha X\beta$$)

### More definitions

An SDD is **S-attributed** if it uses only synthesised attributes, and an SDD is **L-attributed** if it uses synthesised attributes or inherited attributes that depend on some symbol to the left. That is, given a production $$X \to Y_1\dots Y_k$$ attribute $$Y_i.a$$, of some $$Y_i$$ is computed only from the attributes of $$X$$ or$$Y_j$$, $$j < i$$.

## Syntax Directed Translation Schemes (SDTS)

We generalise the notion of SDDs using SDTS. A Syntax Directed Translation Scheme is an SDD with the following modifications

- Semantic rules are replaced by actions possibly with side effects. 
- The exact time of the action is specified; an action computing an inherited attribute of a non-terminal appears just before the non-terminal.

For example, for the previous type analysis rules, we have

```c
decl -> type {$2 -> type = $1 -> type } VarList
```

We similarly define **S-Attributed SDTS** as SDTS that only use synthesised attributes and all actions appear at the end of the RHS of a production. **L-Attributed SDTS** use only synthesises attributes or attributes that depend on a symbol towards the left. The actions may appear in the middle of the rules end and at the end of the RHS of a production.

## Type Analysis

### Type Expressions and Representation

A type expression describes types of all entities (variable, functions) in a program - basic types, user-defined types, and derived types. 

**Note.** The size of an array is not a part of the type in C for validation. It is just used for memory allocation. $$\tau_1 \times \tau_2$$ describes the product of two types, and $$\tau_1 \to \tau_2$$ describes a function that takes arguments described by $$\tau_1$$ and returns the result described by $$\tau_2$$. Product is left-associative and has a higher precedence than $$\to$$.

