# Lecture 17

> `16-03-22`

### Marker Non-terminals

If we have a rule of the form $$X \to Y_1 \{\dots\} Y_2$$, then we convert it to the following set of rules
$$
X \to Y_1 M Y_2 \\
M \to \epsilon \{\dots\}
$$
$$M$$ is a marker non-terminal for $$Y_2$$ in the grammar. $$Y_1.s$$ and $$Y_2.s$$ denote the synthesised attributes of $$Y_1$$ and $$Y_2$$ whereas $$Y_2.i$$ denotes the inherited attribute of $$Y_2$$.

When $$M \to \epsilon \{\dots\}$$ is about to be reduced, the parsing stack contains $$Y_1$$, and the value stack contains $$Y_1.s$$. Once the reduction is done, we add $$M$$ to the parsing stack, and $$Y_2.i$$ is added to the value stack.

Marker non-terminals may cause reduce-reduce conflicts. It is possible to rewrite the yacc scripts to prevent these conflicts.

## Type Analysis (2)

### Type Equivalence 

Consider two different with identical member variables and functions. How do we distinguish the structures themselves and pointers to these structures?

**Name Equivalence** - Same basic types are name equivalent. Derived type are name equivalent if they have the same name. every occurrence of a derived type in declarations is given a unique name.

**Structure Equivalence** - Same basic types are structurally equivalent. Derived types are structurally equivalent if they are obtained by applying the same type constructors to structurally equivalent types, or *one is type name that denotes the other type expressions?*.

Name equivalence implies structural equivalence and not the other way around. C uses structural equivalence for everything except structures. For structures, it uses name equivalence. 

### Type Inferencing

Functional languages do not require separate declarations for variables and types. Some sort of type inferencing is done for class during runtime in C.

## Name and Scope Analysis

We maintain a stack of symbol tables. At the start of a new scope, we push a new symbol table on the stack. We start with the “global” scope symbol table. At the end of every scope, we pop the top symbol table from the stack. For use of a name, we look it up in the symbol table starting from the stack top

- If the name is not found in a symbol table, search in the symbol table below
- If the same name appears in two symbol tables, the one closer to the top hides the one below

However, with this setup, how do we access variables in the outer scope? 

### Static and Dynamic Scoping

Under *static scoping*/ lexical scoping, the names visible at line $$i$$ in procedure $$X$$ are

- Names declared locally within $$X$$ before line $$i$$
- Name declared in procedures enclosing $$X$$ upto the declaration of $$X$$ in the program.

Under *dynamic scoping*, the names visible at line $$i$$ in a procedure $$X$$ are

- Names declared locally within $$X$$ before line $$i$$
- Name declared in procedures enclosing $$X$$ in a call chain reaching $$X$$.

Dynamic scoping is difficult to comprehend is seldom used.
