# Lecture 22

> `01-04-22`

Compiler decides the virtual function for a class statically. Functions are not copied across objects but are used with reference. Functions of the inherited class override the corresponding virtual functions of the parent class. There is no search for the correct function implementation during the runtime. Instead, all the functions are correctly configured at compile time. 

The runtime support looks up the class of the receiver object. Then, it dereferences the class information to access the virtual function table. Following this, there is another dereference to invoke the function itself. 

**Note.** A pointer of the parent class can hold an object of the inherited class but not the other way around. However, when the pointer for the parent class is used, the functions in the inherited class that are not present in the parent class cannot be invoked. That is, the pointer will only be able to invoke functions from the parent class. 

**Note.** Functions of the parent class can be overridden without using virtual functions. Non-virtual functions are copied in each class. However, pointer references are used in the case of virtual functions.  In the case of virtual functions, the pointer of the base class holding an inherited class object will call the functions of the inherited class and not the base class.

For example, consider the following

```c++
class A {
public:
        virtual int f() { return 1; }
        int g() {return 2};
};

class B : public A {
public:
        int f() { return 10; }
        int g() { return 20; }
};
...
A* p; B b;
cout << p -> f(); // Prints 10
cout << p -> g(); // Prints 2
```

> Where are all the unique implementations of virtual functions stored?

## Optimisations

## Register Allocation

Accessing values from the registers in much faster than from the cache. 

### Glocal register allocation using Graph Coloring

We identify the live ranges for each variable, and then construct an interference graph between variables if there is any overlap in the live ranges. Then, we use graph coloring to register allocation. However, graph coloring with $$k$$ colors is NP-complete general. We use some heuristics, and we shall study one of them called - Chaitin-Briggs allocator. The problem is decidable for **chordal graphs** - Every cycle of length 4 or more has a chord connecting two nodes with an edge that is not part of the cycle (applies recursively). Most practical interference graphs are chordal.

### Chaitin-Briggs Register Allocator

1. **Coalescing**

   We eliminate copy statements `x = y` so that we use the sam register for both the variables. Then, the **copy propagation optimisation** replaces the used of `x` by `y`.

2. **Identification of live ranges**

   It is the sequences of statements from a definition of a variable to its last use of that values. We shall discuss **live variables analysis** later.

3. **Identification of interference and construction of interference graph** 

   Live ranges $$I_1$$ and $$I_2$$

4. missed

### Copy Propagation Optimisation

We assume intra-procedural lines of code. That is, the parts of code without any function calls. 

> Slides - Why `e3` and not `e`?

### Discovering Live Ranges

Live ranges are calculated by traversing the code from the end to the beginning. We depict the live range as a set of statement indices. Then we check set intersection for interferences.